PREFACE.

Concerning great things one should either be silent or one should speak
loftily:--loftily--that is to say, cynically and innocently.

What I am now going to relate is the history of the next two centuries.
I shall describe what will happen, what must necessarily happen:
the triumph of Nihilism. This history can be written already; for
necessity itself is at work in bringing it about. This future is
already proclaimed by a hundred different omens; as a destiny it
announces its advent everywhere, for this music of to-morrow all ears
are already pricked. The whole of our culture in Europe has long
been writhing in an agony of suspense which increases from decade
to decade as if in expectation of a catastrophe: restless, violent,
helter-skelter, like a torrent that will reach its bourne, and
refuses to reflect--yea, that even dreads reflection.

On the other hand, the present writer has done little else, hitherto,
than reflect and meditate, like an instinctive philosopher and
anchorite, who found his advantage in isolation--in remaining outside,
in patience, procrastination, and lagging behind; like a weighing and
testing spirit who has already lost his way in every labyrinth of
the future; like a prophetic bird-spirit that looks backwards when
it would announce what is to come; like the first perfect European
Nihilist, who, however, has already outlived Nihilism in his own
soul--who has out-grown, overcome, and dismissed it.

For the reader must not misunderstand the meaning of the title which
has been given to this Evangel of the Future. "The Will to Power:
An Attempted Transvaluation of all Values"--with this formula a
counter-movement finds expression, in regard to both a principle and
a mission; a movement which in some remote future will supersede this
perfect Nihilism; but which nevertheless regards it as a necessary
step, both logically and psychologically, towards its own advent,
and which positively cannot come, except on top of and out of it.
For, why is the triumph of Nihilism inevitable now? Because the
very values current amongst us to-day will arrive at their logical
conclusion in Nihilism,--because Nihilism is the only possible outcome
of our greatest values and ideals,--because we must first experience
Nihilism before we can realise what the actual worth of these "values"
was.... Sooner or later we shall be in need of new values.

FIRST BOOK.

EUROPEAN NIHILISM.

A PLAN.

guests to us?--To begin with, it is a mistake to point to "social
evils," "physiological degeneration," or even to corruption as a cause
of Nihilism. This is the most straightforward and most sympathetic age
that ever was. Evil, whether spiritual, physical, or intellectual, is,
in itself, quite unable to introduce Nihilism, i.e., the absolute
repudiation of worth, purpose, desirability. These evils allow of yet
other and quite different explanations. But there is one very definite
explanation of the phenomena: Nihilism harbours in the heart of
Christian morals.

The downfall of Christianity,--through its morality (which is
insuperable), which finally turns against the Christian God Himself
(the sense of truth, highly developed through Christianity, ultimately
revolts against the falsehood and fictitiousness of all Christian
interpretations of the world and its history. The recoil-stroke of
"God is Truth" in the fanatical Belief, is: "All is false." Buddhism
of action....).

Doubt in morality is the decisive factor. The downfall of the
moral interpretation of the universe, which loses its raison
d'etre once it has tried to take flight to a Beyond, meets its
end in Nihilism. "Nothing has any purpose" (the inconsistency of
one explanation of the world, to which men have devoted untold
energy,--gives rise to the suspicion that all explanations may perhaps
be false). The Buddhistic feature: a yearning for nonentity (Indian
Buddhism has no fundamentally moral development at the back of it; that
is why Nihilism in its case means only morality not overcome; existence
is regarded as a punishment and conceived as an error; error is thus
held to be punishment--a moral valuation). Philosophical attempts to
overcome the "moral God" (Hegel, Pantheism). The vanquishing of
popular ideals: the wizard, the saint, the bard. Antagonism of "true"
and "beautiful" and "good."

Against "purposelessness" on the one hand, against moral valuations
on the other: how far has all science and philosophy been cultivated
heretofore under the influence of moral judgments? And have we not got
the additional factor--the enmity of science, into the bargain? Or the
prejudice against science? Criticism of Spinoza. Christian valuations
everywhere present as remnants in socialistic and positivistic systems.
A criticism of Christian morality is altogether lacking.

The Nihilistic consequences of present natural science (along
with its attempts to escape into a Beyond). Out of its practice there
finally arises a certain self-annihilation, an antagonistic attitude
towards itself--a sort of anti-scientificality. Since Copernicus man
has been rolling away from the centre towards x.

The Nihilistic consequences of the political and politico-economical
way of thinking, where all principles at length become tainted with the
atmosphere of the platform: the breath of mediocrity, insignificance,
dishonesty, etc. Nationalism. Anarchy, etc. Punishment. Everywhere
the deliverer is missing, either as a class or as a single man--the
justifier.

Nihilistic consequences of history and of the "practical historian,"
i.e., the romanticist. The attitude of art is quite unoriginal in
modern life. Its gloominess. Goethe's so-called Olympian State.

Art and the preparation of Nihilism. Romanticism (the conclusion of
Wagner's Ring of the Nibelung).

NIHILISM.

NIHILISM AS AN OUTCOME OF THE VALUATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS OF
EXISTENCE WHICH HAVE PREVAILED HERETOFORE.

What does Nihilism mean?--That the highest values are losing their
value. There is no bourne. There is no answer to the question: "to
what purpose?"

Thorough Nihilism is the conviction that life is absurd, in the
light of the highest values already discovered; it also includes the
view that we have not the smallest right to assume the existence of
transcendental objects or things in themselves, which would be either
divine or morality incarnate.

This view is a result of fully developed "truthfulness": therefore a
consequence of the belief in morality.

What advantages did the Christian hypothesis of morality offer?

It bestowed an intrinsic value upon men, which contrasted with
their apparent insignificance and subordination to chance in the
eternal flux of becoming and perishing.

It served the purpose of God's advocates, inasmuch as it granted
the world a certain perfection despite its sorrow and evil--it also
granted the world that proverbial "freedom": evil seemed full of
meaning.

It assumed that man could have a knowledge of absolute values,
and thus granted him adequate perception for the most important
things.

It prevented man from despising himself as man, from turning
against life, and from being driven to despair by knowledge: it was a
self-preservative measure.

In short: Morality was the great antidote against practical and
theoretical Nihilism.

But among the forces reared by morality, there was truthfulness:
this in the end turns against morality, exposes the teleology of the
latter, its interestedness, and now the recognition of this lie so
long incorporated, from which we despaired of ever freeing ourselves,
acts just like a stimulus. We perceive certain needs in ourselves,
implanted during the long dynasty of the moral interpretation of life,
which now seem to us to be needs of untruth: on the other hand, those
very needs represent the highest values owing to which we are able to
endure life. We have ceased from attaching any worth to what we
know, and we dare not attach any more worth to that with which we
would fain deceive ourselves--from this antagonism there results a
process of dissolution.

This is the antinomy: In so far as we believe in morality, we condemn
existence.

The highest values in the service of which man ought to live, more
particularly when they oppressed and constrained him most--these
social values, owing to their tone-strengthening tendencies,
were built over men's heads as though they were the will of God or
"reality," or the actual world, or even a hope of a world to come.
Now that the lowly origin of these values has become known, the
whole universe seems to have been transvalued and to have lost its
significance--but this is only an intermediate stage.

The consequence of Nihilism (disbelief in all values) as a result
of a moral valuation:--We have grown to dislike egotism (even
though we have realised the impossibility of altruism);--we have
grown to dislike what is most necessary (although we have recognised
the impossibility of a liberum arbitrium and of an "intelligible
freedom"[1]). We perceive that we do not reach the spheres in which we
have set our values--at the same time those other spheres in which we
live have not thereby gained one iota in value. On the contrary, we
are tired, because we have lost the main incentive to live. "All in
vain hitherto!"

"Pessimism as a preparatory state to Nihilism."

A. Pessimism viewed as strength--in what respect? In the energy of
its logic, as anarchy, Nihilism, and analysis.

B. Pessimism regarded as collapse--in what sense? In the sense of
its being a softening influence, a sort of cosmopolitan befingering, a
"tout comprendre," and historical spirit.

Critical tension: extremes make their appearance and become dominant.

The logic of Pessimism leads finally to Nihilism: what is the force at
work?--The notion that there are no values, and no purpose: the
recognition of the part that moral valuations have played in all other
lofty values.

Result: moral valuations are condemnations, negations; morality is the
abdication of the will to live....

[Footnote 1: This is a Kantian term. Kant recognised two kinds of
Freedom--the practical and the transcendental kind. The first belongs
to the phenomenal, the second to the intelligible world.--TRANSLATOR'S
NOTE.]

THE COLLAPSE OF COSMOPOLITAN VALUES.

Nihilism will have to manifest itself as a psychological condition,
first when we have sought in all that has happened a purpose which
is not there: so that the seeker will ultimately lose courage.
Nihilism is therefore the coming into consciousness of the long
waste of strength, the pain of "futility," uncertainty, the lack
of an opportunity to recover in some way, or to attain to a state of
peace concerning anything--shame in one's own presence, as if one
had cheated oneself too long.... The purpose above-mentioned might
have been achieved: in the form of a "realisation" of a most high
canon of morality in all worldly phenomena, the moral order of the
universe; or in the form of the increase of love and harmony in the
traffic of humanity; or in the nearer approach to a general condition
of happiness; or even in the march towards general nonentity--any sort
of goal always constitutes a purpose. The common factor to all these
appearances is that something will be attained, through the process
itself: and now we perceive that Becoming has been aiming at nothing,
and has achieved nothing. Hence the disillusionment in regard to a
so-called purpose in existence, as a cause of Nihilism; whether this
be in respect of a very definite purpose, or generalised into the
recognition that all the hypotheses are false which have hitherto been
offered as to the object of life, and which relate to the whole of
"Evolution" (man no longer an assistant in, let alone the culmination
of, the evolutionary process).

Nihilism will manifest itself as a psychological condition, in the
second place, when man has fixed a totality, a systematisation, even an
organisation in and behind all phenomena, so that the soul thirsting
for respect and admiration will wallow in the general idea of a highest
ruling and administrative power (if it be the soul of a logician,
the sequence of consequences and perfect reasoning will suffice to
conciliate everything). A kind of unity, some form of "monism":'
and as a result of this belief man becomes obsessed by a feeling of
profound relativity and dependence in the presence of an All which
is infinitely superior to him, a sort of divinity. "The general good
exacts the surrender of the individual ..." but lo, there is no such
general good! At bottom, man loses the belief in his own worth when no
infinitely precious entity manifests itself through him--that is to
say, he conceived such an All, in order to be able to believe in his
own worth.

Nihilism, as a psychological condition, has yet a third and last form.
Admitting these two points of view: that no purpose can be assigned
to Becoming, and that no great entity rules behind all Becoming, in
which the individual may completely lose himself as in an element of
superior value; there still remains the subterfuge which would
consist in condemning this whole world of Becoming as an illusion,
and in discovering a world which would lie beyond it, and would be a
real world. The moment, however, that man perceives that this world
has been devised only for the purpose of meeting certain psychological
needs, and that he has no right whatsoever to it, the final form of
Nihilism comes into being, which comprises a denial of a metaphysical
world, and which forbids itself all belief in a real world. From
this standpoint, the reality of Becoming is the only reality that
is admitted: all bypaths to back-worlds and false godheads are
abandoned--but this world is no longer endured, although no one wishes
to disown it.

What has actually happened? The feeling of worthlessness was realised
when it was understood that neither the notion of "Purpose" nor
that of "Unity" nor that of "Truth" could be made to interpret
the general character of existence. Nothing is achieved or obtained
thereby; the unity which intervenes in the multiplicity of events is
entirely lacking: the character of existence is not "true," it is
false; there is certainly no longer any reason to believe in a real
world. In short, the categories, "Purpose," "Unity," "Being," by means
of which we had lent some worth to life, we have once more divorced
from it--and the world now appears worthless to us....

Admitting that we have recognised the impossibility of interpreting
world by means of these three categories, and that from this
standpoint the world begins to be worthless to us; we must ask
ourselves whence we derived our belief in these three categories.
Let us see if it is possible to refuse to believe in them. If we can
deprive them of their value, the proof that they cannot be applied to
the world, is no longer a sufficient reason for depriving that world
of its value.

Result: The belief in the categories of reason[2] is the cause
of Nihilism--we have measured the worth of the world according to
categories which can only be applied to a purely fictitious world.

Conclusion: All values with which we have tried, hitherto, to lend
the world some worth, from our point of view, and with which we have
therefore deprived it of all worth (once these values have been
shown to be inapplicable)--all these values, are, psychologically,
the results of certain views of utility, established for the purpose
of maintaining and increasing the dominion of certain communities:
but falsely projected into the nature of things. It is always man's
exaggerated ingenuousness to regard himself as the sense and measure
of all things.

[Footnote 2: This probably refers to Kant's celebrated table of
twelve categories. The four classes, quantity, quality, relation, and
modality, are each provided with three categories.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.]

Nihilism represents an intermediary pathological condition (the vast
generalisation, the conclusion that there is no purpose in anything,
is pathological): whether it be that the productive forces are not
yet strong enough--or that decadence still hesitates and has not yet
discovered its expedients.

The conditions of this hypothesis:--That there is no truth; that
there is no absolute state of affairs--no "thing-in-itself." This
alone is Nihilism, and of the most extreme kind. It finds that the
value of things consists precisely in the fact that these values are
not real and never have been real, but that they are only a symptom
of strength on the part of the valuer, a simplification serving the
purposes of existence.

Values and their modification are related to the growth of power of
the valuer.

The measure of disbelief and of the "freedom of spirit" which is
tolerated, viewed as an expression of the growth of power.

"Nihilism" viewed as the ideal of the highest spiritual power, of the
over-rich life, partly destructive, partly ironical.

What is belief? How is a belief born? All belief assumes that
something is true.

The extremest form of Nihilism would mean that all belief--all
assumption of truth--is false: because no real world is at hand.
It were therefore: only an appearance seen in perspective, whose
origin must be found in us (seeing that we are constantly in need of a
narrower, a shortened, and simplified world).

This should be realised, that the extent to which we can, in our heart
of hearts, acknowledge appearance, and the necessity of falsehood,
without going to rack and ruin, is the measure of strength.

In this respect, Nihilism, in that it is the negation of a real world
and of Being, might be a divine view of the world.

If we are disillusioned, we have not become so in regard to life,
but owing to the fact that our eyes have been opened to all kinds
of "desiderata." With mocking anger we survey that which is called
"Ideal": we despise ourselves only because we are unable at every
moment of our lives to quell that absurd emotion which is called
"Idealism." This pampering by means of ideals is stronger than the
anger of the disillusioned one.

To what extent does Schopenhauerian Nihilism continue to be the result
of the same ideal as that which gave rise to Christian Theism? The
amount of certainty concerning the most exalted desiderata, the highest
values and the greatest degree of perfection, was so great, that the
philosophers started out from it as if it had been an a priori and
absolute fact: "God" at the head, as the given quantity--Truth. "To
become like God," "to be absorbed into the Divine Being"--these were
for centuries the most ingenuous and most convincing desiderata (but
that which convinces is not necessarily true on that account: it is
nothing more nor less than convincing. An observation for donkeys).

The granting of a personal-reality to this accretion of ideals
has been unlearned: people have become atheistic. But has the ideal
actually been abandoned? The latest metaphysicians, as a matter of
fact, still seek their true "reality" in it--the "thing-in-itself"
beside which everything else is merely appearance. Their dogma is, that
because our world of appearance is so obviously not the expression
of that ideal, it therefore cannot be "true"--and at bottom does not
even lead back to that metaphysical world as cause. The unconditioned,
in so far as it stands for that highest degree of perfection, cannot
possibly be the reason of all the conditioned. Schopenhauer, who
desired it otherwise, was obliged to imagine this metaphysical basis as
the antithesis to the ideal, as "an evil, blind will": thus it could
be "that which appears," that which manifests itself in the world of
appearance. But even so, he did not give up that ideal absolute--he
circumvented it....

(Kant seems to have needed the hypothesis of "intelligible freedom,"[3]
in order to relieve the ens perfectum of the responsibility of having
contrived this world as it is, in short, in order to explain evil:
scandalous logic for a philosopher!).

[Footnote 3: See Note on p. 11.]

The most general sign of modern times: in his own estimation, man has
lost an infinite amount of dignity. For a long time he was the centre
and tragic hero of life in general; then he endeavoured to demonstrate
at least his relationship to the most essential and in itself most
valuable side of life--as all metaphysicians do, who wish to hold fast
to the dignity of man, in their belief that moral values are cardinal
values. He who has let God go, clings all the more strongly to the
belief in morality.

Every purely moral valuation (as, for instance, the Buddhistic)
terminates in Nihilism: Europe must expect the same thing! It is
supposed that one can get along with a morality bereft of a religious
background; but in this direction the road to Nihilism is opened. There
is nothing in religion which compels us to regard ourselves as valuing
creatures.

The question which Nihilism puts, namely, "to what purpose?" is the
outcome of a habit, hitherto, to regard the purpose as something fixed,
given and exacted from outside--that is to say, by some supernatural
authority. Once the belief in this has been unlearned, the force of an
old habit leads to the search after another authority, which would
know how to speak unconditionally, and could point to goals and
missions. The authority of the conscience now takes the first place
(the more morality is emancipated from theology, the more imperative
does it become) as a compensation for the personal authority. Or
the authority of reason. Or the gregarious instinct (the herd).
Or history with its immanent spirit, which has its goal in itself,
and to which one can abandon oneself. One would like to evade the
will, as also the willing of a goal and the risk of setting oneself
a goal. One would like to get rid of the responsibility (Fatalism
would be accepted). Finally: Happiness and with a dash of humbug, the
happiness of the greatest number.

It is said:--

A definite goal is quite unnecessary.

Such a goal cannot possibly be foreseen. Precisely now, when will
in its fullest strength were necessary, it is in the weakest
and most pusillanimous condition. Absolute mistrust concerning the
organising power of the will.

The perfect Nihilist.--The Nihilist's eye idealises in an ugly
sense, and is inconstant to what it remembers: it allows its
recollections to go astray and to fade, it does not protect them from
that cadaverous coloration with which weakness dyes all that is distant
and past. And what it does not do for itself it fails to do for the
whole of mankind as well--that is to say, it allows it to drop.

Nihilism. It may be two things:--

A. Nihilism as a sign of enhanced spiritual strength: active Nihilism.

B. Nihilism as a sign of the collapse and decline of spiritual
strength: passive Nihilism.

Nihilism, a normal condition.

It may be a sign of strength; spiritual vigour may have increased to
such an extent that the goals toward which man has marched hitherto
(the "convictions," articles of faith) are no longer suited to it
(for a faith generally expresses the exigencies of the conditions of
existence, a submission to the authority of an order of things which
conduces to the prosperity, the growth and power of a living
creature ...); on the other hand, a sign of insufficient strength, to
fix a goal, a "wherefore," and a faith for itself.

It reaches its maximum of relative strength, as a powerful
destructive force, in the form of active Nihilism.

Its opposite would be weary Nihilism, which no longer attacks: its
most renowned form being Buddhism: as passive Nihilism, a sign of
weakness: spiritual strength may be fatigued, exhausted, so that the
goals and values which have prevailed hitherto are no longer suited
to it and are no longer believed in--so that the synthesis of values
and goals (upon which every strong culture stands) decomposes, and
the different values contend with one another: Disintegration, then
everything which is relieving, which heals, becalms, or stupefies,
steps into the foreground under the cover of various disguises,
either religious, moral, political or aesthetic, etc.

Nihilism is not only a meditating over the "in vain!"--not only the
belief that everything deserves to perish; but one actually puts
one's shoulder to the plough; one destroys. This, if you will, is
illogical; but the Nihilist does not believe in the necessity of being
logical.... It is the condition of strong minds and wills; and to these
it is impossible to be satisfied with the negation of judgment: the
negation by deeds proceeds from their nature. Annihilation by the
reasoning faculty seconds annihilation by the hand.

Concerning the genesis of the Nihilist. The courage of all one really
knows comes but late in life. It is only quite recently that I have
acknowledged to myself that heretofore I have been a Nihilist from top
to toe. The energy and thoroughness with which I marched forward as a
Nihilist deceived me concerning this fundamental principle. When one is
progressing towards a goal it seems impossible that "aimlessness per
se" should be one's fundamental article of faith.

The Pessimism of strong natures. The "wherefore" after a terrible
struggle, even after victory. That something may exist which is a
hundred times more important than the question, whether we feel well
or unwell, is the fundamental instinct of all strong natures--and
consequently too, whether the others feel well or unwell. In short,
that we have a purpose, for which we would not even hesitate to
sacrifice men, run all risks, and bend our backs to the worst: this
is the great passion.

FURTHER CAUSES OF NIHILISM.

The causes of Nihilism: (1) The higher species is lacking, i.e.,
the species whose inexhaustible fruitfulness and power would uphold our
belief in Man (think only of what is owed to Napoleon--almost all the
higher hopes of this century).

The inferior species ("herd," "ass," "society") is forgetting
modesty, and inflates its needs into cosmic and metaphysical
values. In this way all life is vulgarised: for inasmuch as the
mass of mankind rules, it tyrannises over the exceptions, so that
these lose their belief in themselves and become Nihilists.

All attempts to conceive of a new species come to nothing
("romanticism," the artist, the philosopher; against Carlyle's attempt
to lend them the highest moral values).

The result is that higher types are resisted.

The downfall and insecurity of all higher types. The struggle against
genius ("popular poetry," etc.). Sympathy with the lowly and the
suffering as a standard for the elevation of the soul.

The philosopher is lacking, the interpreter of deeds, and not alone
he who poetises them.

Imperfect Nihilism--its forms: we are now surrounded by them.

All attempts made to escape Nihilism, which do not consist in
transvaluing the values that have prevailed hitherto, only make the
matter worse; they complicate the problem.

The varieties of self-stupefaction. In one's heart of hearts, not to
know, whither? Emptiness. The attempt to rise superior to it all by
means of emotional intoxication: emotional intoxication in the form of
music, in the form of cruelty in the tragic joy over the ruin of the
noblest, and in the form of blind, gushing enthusiasm over individual
men or distinct periods (in the form of hatred, etc.). The attempt
to work blindly, like a scientific instrument; to keep an eye on the
many small joys, like an investigator, for instance (modesty towards
oneself); the mysticism of the voluptuous joy of eternal emptiness;
art "for art's sake" ("le fait"), "immaculate investigation," in the
form of narcotics against the disgust of oneself; any kind of incessant
work, any kind of small foolish fanaticism; the medley of all
means, illness as the result of general profligacy (dissipation kills
pleasure).

As a result, feeble will-power.

Excessive pride and the humiliation of petty weakness felt as a
contrast.

The time is coming when we shall have to pay for having been
Christians for two thousand years: we are losing the equilibrium
which enables us to live--for a long while we shall not know in what
direction we are travelling. We are hurling ourselves headlong into the
opposite valuations, with that degree of energy which could only have
been engendered in man by an overvaluation of himself.

Now, everything is false from the root, words and nothing but words,
confused, feeble, or over-strained.

There is a seeking after a sort of earthly solution of the
problem of life, but in the same sense as that of the final triumph
of truth, love, justice (socialism: "equality of persons").

There is also an attempt to hold fast to the moral ideal (with
altruism, self-sacrifice, and the denial of the will, in the front
rank).

There is even an attempt to hold fast to a "Beyond": were it
only as an antilogical x; but it is forthwith interpreted in such a
way that a kind of metaphysical solace, after the old style, may be
derived from it.

There is an attempt to read the phenomena of life in such a
way as to arrive at the divine guidance of old, with its powers
of rewarding, punishing, educating, and of generally conducing to a
something better in the order of things.

People once more believe in good and evil; so that the victory of
the good and the annihilation of the evil is regarded as a duty (this
is English, and is typical of that blockhead, John Stuart Mill).

The contempt felt for "naturalness," for the desires and for the
ego: the attempt to regard even the highest intellectuality of art as a
result of an impersonal and disinterested attitude.

The Church is still allowed to meddle in all the essential
occurrences and incidents in the life of the individual, with a view to
consecrating it and giving it a loftier meaning: we still have the
"Christian State" and the "Christian marriage."

There have been more thoughtful and more destructively thoughtful[4]
times than ours: times like those in which Buddha appeared, for
instance, in which the people themselves, after centuries of sectarian
quarrels, had sunk so deeply into the abyss of philosophical dogmas,
as, from time to time, European people have done in regard to the fine
points of religious dogma. "Literature" and the press would be the last
things to seduce one to any high opinion of the spirit of our times:
the millions of Spiritists, and a Christianity with gymnastic exercises
of that ghastly ugliness which is characteristic of all English
inventions, throw more light on the subject.

European Pessimism is still in its infancy--a fact which argues
against it: it has not yet attained to that prodigious and yearning
fixity of sight to which it attained in India once upon a time, and
in which nonentity is reflected; there is still too much of the
"ready-made," and not enough of the "evolved" in its constitution, too
much learned and poetic Pessimism; I mean that a good deal of it has
been discovered, invented, and "created," but not caused.

[Footnote 4: zerdachtere.]

Criticism of the Pessimism which has prevailed hitherto. The want of
the eudaemonological standpoint, as a last abbreviation of the question:
what is the purpose of it all? The reduction of gloom.

Our Pessimism: the world has not the value which we believed it to
have,--our faith itself has so increased our instinct for research that
we are compelled to say this to-day. In the first place, it seems of
less value: at first it is felt to be of less value,--only in this
sense are we pessimists,--that is to say, with the will to acknowledge
this transvaluation without reserve, and no longer, as heretofore, to
deceive ourselves and chant the old old story.

It is precisely in this way that we find the pathos which urges us to
seek for new values. In short: the world might have far more value
than we thought--we must get behind the naivete of our ideals, for
it is possible that, in our conscious effort to give it the highest
interpretation, we have not bestowed even a moderately just value upon
it.

What has been deified? The valuing instinct inside the community
(that which enabled it to survive).

What has been calumniated? That which has tended to separate higher
men from their inferiors, the instincts which cleave gulfs and build
barriers.

Causes effecting the rise of Pessimism:--

The most powerful instincts and those which promised most for the
future have hitherto been calumniated, so that life has a curse upon
it.

The growing bravery and the more daring mistrust on the part of man
have led him to discover the fact that these instincts cannot be
cut adrift from life, and thus he turns to embrace life.

Only the most mediocre, who are not conscious of this conflict,
prosper; the higher species fail, and as an example of degeneration
tend to dispose all hearts against them--on the other hand, there is
some indignation caused by the mediocre positing themselves as the end
and meaning of all things. No one can any longer reply to the question:
"Why?"

Belittlement, susceptibility to pain, unrest, haste, and confusion
are steadily increasing--the materialisation of all these tendencies,
which is called "civilisation," becomes every day more simple, with
the result that, in the face of the monstrous machine, the individual
despairs and surrenders.

Modern Pessimism is an expression of the uselessness only of the
modern world, not of the world and existence as such.

The "preponderance of pain over pleasure" or the reverse (Hedonism);
both of these doctrines are already signposts to Nihilism....

For here, in both cases, no other final purpose is sought than the
phenomenon pleasure or pain.

But only a man who no longer dares to posit a will, a purpose, and a
final goal can speak in this way--according to every healthy type of
man, the worth of life is certainly not measured by the standard of
these secondary things. And a preponderance of pain would be possible
and, in spite of it, a mighty will, a saying of yea to life, and a
holding of this preponderance for necessary.

"Life is not worth living"; "Resignation"; "what is the good of
tears?"--this is a feeble and sentimental attitude of mind. "Un
monstre gai vaut mieux qu'un sentimental ennuyeux."

The philosophie Nihilist is convinced that all phenomena are without
sense and are in vain, and that there ought to be no such thing as
Being without sense and in vain. But whence comes this "There ought
not to be?"--whence this "sense" and this standard? At bottom the
Nihilist supposes that the sight of such a desolate, useless Being is
unsatisfying to the philosopher, and fills him with desolation and
despair. This aspect of the case is opposed to our subtle sensibilities
as a philosopher. It leads to the absurd conclusion that the character
of existence must perforce afford pleasure to the philosopher if it
is to have any right to subsist.

Now it is easy to understand that happiness and unhappiness, within
the phenomena of this world, can only serve the purpose of means:
the question yet remaining to be answered is, whether it will
ever be possible for us to perceive the "object" and "purpose" of
life--whether the problem of purposelessness or the reverse is not
quite beyond our ken.

The development of Nihilism out of Pessimism. The denaturalisation
of Values. Scholasticism of values. The values isolated, idealistic,
instead of ruling and leading action, turn against it and condemn it.

Opposites introduced in the place of natural gradations and ranks.
Hatred of the order of rank. Opposites are compatible with a plebeian
age, because they are more easy to grasp.

The rejected world is opposed to an artificially constructed "true
and valuable" one. At last we discover out of what material the "true"
world was built; all that remains, now, is the rejected world, and to
the account of our reasons for rejecting it we place our greatest
disillusionment.

At this point Nihilism is reached; the directing values have been
retained--nothing more!

This gives rise to the problem of strength and weakness:--

The weak fall to pieces upon it;

The strong destroy what does not fall to pieces of its own accord;

The strongest overcome the directing values.

The whole condition of affairs produces the tragic age.

THE NIHILISTIC MOVEMENT AS AN EXPRESSION OF DECADENCE.

Just lately an accidental and in every way inappropriate term has been
very much misused: everywhere people are speaking of "Pessimism,"
and there is a fight around the question (to which some replies must be
forthcoming): which is right--Pessimism or Optimism?

People have not yet seen what is so terribly-obvious--namely, that
Pessimism is not a problem but a symptom,--that the term ought to be
replaced by "Nihilism,"--that the question, "to be or not to be," is
itself an illness, a sign of degeneracy, an idiosyncrasy.

The Nihilistic movement is only an expression of physiological
decadence.

To be understood:--That every kind of decline and tendency to
sickness has incessantly been at work in helping to create general
evaluations: that in those valuations which now dominate, decadence
has even begun to preponderate, that we have not only to combat the
conditions which present misery and degeneration have brought into
being; but that all decadence, previous to that of our own times, has
been transmitted and has therefore remained an active force amongst
us. A universal departure of this kind, on the part of man, from
his fundamental instincts, such universal decadence of the valuing
judgment, is the note of interrogation par excellence, the real
riddle, which the animal "man" sets to all philosophers.

The notion "decadence":--Decay, decline, and waste, are, per se,
in no way open to objection; they are the natural consequences of life
and vital growth. The phenomenon of decadence is just as necessary to
life as advance or progress is: we are not in a position which enables
us to suppress it. On the contrary, reason would have it retain its
rights.

It is disgraceful on the part of socialist-theorists to argue that
circumstances and social combinations could be devised which would put
an end to all vice, illness, crime, prostitution, and poverty.... But
that is tantamount to condemning Life ... a society is not at liberty
to remain young. And even in its prime it must bring forth ordure and
decaying matter. The more energetically and daringly it advances, the
richer will it be in failures and in deformities, and the nearer it
will be to its fall. Age is not deferred by means of institutions. Nor
is illness. Nor is vice.

Fundamental aspect of the nature of decadence: what has heretofore
been regarded as its causes are its effects.

In this way, the whole perspective of the problems of morality is
altered.

All the struggle of morals against vice, luxury, crime, and even
against illness, seems a naivete, a superfluous effort: there is no
such thing as "improvement" (a word against repentance).

Decadence itself is not a thing that can be withstood: it is
absolutely necessary and is proper to all ages and all peoples. That
which must be withstood, and by all means in our power, is the
spreading of the contagion among the sound parts of the organism.

Is that done? The very reverse is done. It is precisely on this
account that one makes a stand on behalf of humanity.

How do the highest values created hitherto stand in relation to this
fundamental question in biology? Philosophy, religion, morality, art,
etc.

(The remedy: militarism, for instance, from Napoleon onwards, who
regarded civilisation as his natural enemy.)

All those things which heretofore have been regarded as the causes of
degeneration, are really its effects.

But those things also which have been regarded as the remedies of
degeneration are only palliatives of certain effects thereof: the
"cured" are types of the degenerate.

The results of decadence: vice--viciousness; illness--sickliness;
crime--criminality; celibacy--sterility; hysteria--the weakness of the
will; alcoholism; pessimism, anarchy; debauchery (also of the spirit).
The calumniators, underminers, sceptics, and destroyers.

Concerning the notion "decadence." (1) Scepticism is a result of
decadence: just as spiritual debauchery is.

Moral corruption is a result of decadence (the weakness of the will
and the need of strong stimulants).

Remedies, whether psychological or moral, do not alter the march
of decadence, they do not arrest anything; physiologically they do not
count.

A peep into the enormous futility of these pretentious "reactions";
they are forms of anaesthetising oneself against certain fatal
symptoms resulting from the prevailing condition of things; they do
not eradicate the morbid element; they are often heroic attempts to
cancel the decadent man, to allow only a minimum of his deleterious
influence to survive.

Nihilism is not a cause, but only the rationale of decadence.

The "good" and the "bad" are no more than two types of decadence:
they come together in all its fundamental phenomena.

The social problem is a result of decadence.

Illnesses, more particularly those attacking the nerves and the
head, are signs that the defensive strength of strong nature is
lacking; a proof of this is that irritability which causes pleasure and
pain to be regarded as problems of the first order.

The most common types of decadence: (1) In the belief that they are
remedies, cures are chosen which only precipitate exhaustion;--this is
the case with Christianity (to point to the most egregious example of
mistaken instinct);--this is also the case with "progress."

The power of resisting stimuli is on the wane--chance rules
supreme: events are inflated and drawn out until they appear monstrous
... a suppression of the "personality," a disintegration of the
will; in this regard we may mention a whole class of morality, the
altruistic, that which is incessantly preaching pity, and whose most
essential feature is the weakness of the personality, so that it rings
in unison, and, like an over-sensitive string, does not cease from
vibrating ... extreme irritability....

Cause and effect are confounded: decadence is not understood as
physiological, and its results are taken to be the causes of the
general indisposition:--this applies to all religious morality.

A state of affairs is desired in which suffering shall cease;
life is actually considered the cause of all ills--unconscious and
insensitive states (sleep and syncope) are held in incomparably higher
esteem than the conscious states; hence a method of life.

Concerning the hygiene of the "weak." All that is done in weakness ends
in failure. Moral: do nothing. The worst of it is, that precisely the
strength required in order to stop action, and to cease from reacting,
is most seriously diseased under the influence of weakness: that one
never reacts more promptly or more blindly than when one should not
react at all.

The strength of a character is shown by the ability to delay and
postpone reaction: a certain adiaphoria is just as proper to it, as
involuntariness in recoiling, suddenness and lack of restraint in
"action," are proper to weakness. The will is weak: and the recipe
for preventing foolish acts would be: to have a strong will and to do
nothing--contradiction. A sort of self-destruction, the instinct of
self-preservation is compromised.... The weak man injures himself....
That is the decadent type.

As a matter of fact, we meet with a vast amount of thought concerning
the means wherewith impassibility may be induced. To this extent, the
instincts are on the right scent; for to do nothing is more useful than
to do something....

All the practices of private orders, of solitary philosophers, and of
fakirs, are suggested by a correct consideration of the fact, that a
certain kind of man is most useful to himself when he hinders his own
action as much as possible.

Relieving measures: absolute obedience, mechanical activity, total
isolation from men and things that might exact immediate decisions and
actions.

Weakness of Will: this is a fable that can lead astray. For there
is no will, consequently neither a strong nor a weak one. The
multiplicity and disintegration of the instincts, the want of system in
their relationship, constitute what is known as a "weak will"; their
co-ordination, under the government of one individual among them,
results in a "strong will"--in the first case vacillation and a lack
of equilibrium is noticeable: in the second, precision and definite
direction.

That which is inherited is not illness, but a predisposition to
illness: a lack of the powers of resistance against injurious external
influences, etc. etc, broken powers of resistance; expressed morally:
resignation and humility in the presence of the enemy.

I have often wondered whether it would not be possible to class all the
highest values of the philosophies, moralities, and religions which
have been devised hitherto, with the values of the feeble, the insane
and the neurasthenic in a milder form, they present the same evils.

The value of all morbid conditions consists in the fact that they
magnify certain normal phenomena which are difficult to discern in
normal conditions....

Health and illness are not essentially different, as the ancient
doctors believed and as a few practitioners still believe to-day. They
cannot be imagined as two distinct principles or entities which fight
for the living organism and make it their battlefield. That is nonsense
and mere idle gossip, which no longer holds water. As a matter of
fact, there is only a difference of degree between these two living
conditions: exaggeration, want of proportion, want of harmony among the
normal phenomena, constitute the morbid state (Claude Bernard).

Just as "evil" may be regarded as exaggeration, discord, and want of
proportion, so can "good" be regarded as a sort of protective diet
against the danger of exaggeration, discord, and want of proportion.

Hereditary weakness as a dominant feeling: the cause of the
prevailing values.

N.B.--Weakness is in demand--why?... mostly because people cannot be
anything else than weak.

Weakening considered a duty: The weakening of the desires, of the
feelings of pleasure and of pain, of the will to power, of the will
to pride, to property and to more property; weakening in the form of
humility; weakening in the form of a belief; weakening in the form
of repugnance and shame in the presence of all that is natural--in
the form of a denial of life, in the form of illness and chronic
feebleness; weakening in the form of a refusal to take revenge, to
offer resistance, to become an enemy, and to show anger.

Blunders in the treatment: there is no attempt at combating weakness
by means of any fortifying system; but by a sort of justification
consisting of moralising; i.e., by means of interpretation.

Two totally different conditions are confused: for instance, the
repose of strength, which is essentially abstinence from reaction
(the prototype of the gods whom nothing moves), and the peace of
exhaustion, rigidity to the point of anaesthesia. All these philosophic
and ascetic modes of procedure aspire to the second state, but actually
pretend to attain to the first ... for they ascribe to the condition
they have reached the attributes that would be in keeping only with a
divine state.

The most dangerous misunderstanding.--There is one concept which
apparently allows of no confusion or ambiguity, and that is the concept
exhaustion. Exhaustion may be acquired or inherited--in any case it
alters the aspect and value of things.

Unlike him who involuntarily gives of the superabundance which he
both feels and represents, to the things about him, and who sees them
fuller, mightier, and more pregnant with promises,--who, in fact, can
bestow,--the exhausted one belittles and disfigures everything he
sees--he impoverishes its worth: he is detrimental....

No mistake seems possible in this matter: and yet history discloses the
terrible fact, that the exhausted have always been confounded with
those with the most abundant resources, and the latter with the most
detrimental.

The pauper in vitality, the feeble one, impoverishes even life: the
wealthy man, in vital powers, enriches it. The first is the parasite of
the second: the second is a bestower of his abundance. How is confusion
possible?

When he who was exhausted came forth with the bearing of a very
active and energetic man (when degeneration implied a certain excess
of spiritual and nervous discharge), he was mistaken for the wealthy
man. He inspired terror. The cult of the madman is also always the cult
of him who is rich in vitality, and who is a powerful man. The fanatic,
the one possessed, the religious epileptic, all eccentric creatures
have been regarded as the highest types of power: as divine.

This kind of strength which inspires terror seemed to be, above all,
divine: this was the starting-point of authority; here wisdom
was interpreted, hearkened to, and sought. Out of this there was
developed, everywhere almost, a will to "deify," i.e., to a typical
degeneration of spirit, body, and nerves: an attempt to discover the
road to this higher form of being. To make oneself ill or mad, to
provoke the symptoms of serious disorder--was called getting stronger,
becoming more superhuman, more terrible and more wise. People thought
they would thus attain to such wealth of power, that they would be able
to dispense it. Wheresoever there have been prayers, some one has
been sought who had something to give away.

What led astray, here, was the experience of intoxication. This
increases the feeling of power to the highest degree, therefore, to the
mind of the ingenuous, it is power. On the highest altar of power
the most intoxicated man must stand, the ecstatic. (There are two
causes of intoxication: superabundant life, and a condition of morbid
nutrition of the brain.)

Acquired, not inherited exhaustion: (1) inadequate nourishment,
often the result of ignorance concerning diet, as, for instance, in the
case of scholars; (2) erotic precocity: the damnation more especially
of the youth of France--Parisian youths, above all, who are already
dirtied and ruined when they step out of their lycees into the world,
and who cannot break the chains of despicable tendencies; ironical and
scornful towards themselves--galley-slaves despite all their refinement
(moreover, in the majority of cases, already a symptom of racial and
family decadence, as all hypersensitiveness is; and examples of the
infection of environment: to be influenced by one's environment is
also a sign of decadence); (3) alcoholism, not the instinct but the
habit, foolish imitation, the cowardly or vain adaptation to a ruling
fashion. What a blessing a Jew is among Germans! See the obtuseness,
the flaxen head, the blue eye, and the lack of intellect in the face,
the language, and the bearing; the lazy habit of stretching the limbs,
and the need of repose among Germans--a need which is not the result of
overwork, but of the disgusting excitation and over-excitation caused
by alcohol.

A theory of exhaustion.--Vice, the insane (also artists), the
criminals, the anarchists--these are not the oppressed classes, but
the outcasts of the community of all classes hitherto.

Seeing that all our classes are permeated by these elements, we have
grasped the fact that modern society is not a "society" or a "body,"
but a diseased agglomeration of Chandala,--a society which no longer
has the strength even to excrete.

To what extent living together for centuries has very much deepened
sickliness:

modern virtue 
modern intellect as forms of disease.
modern science 

The state of corruption.--The interrelation of all forms of
corruption should be understood, and the Christian form (Pascal as
the type), as also the socialistic and communistic (a result of the
Christian), should not be overlooked (from the standpoint of natural
science, the highest conception of society according to socialists,
is the lowest in the order of rank among societies); the "Beyond"
--corruption: as though outside the real world of Becoming there were a
world of Being.

Here there must be no compromise, but selection, annihilation, and
war--the Christian Nihilistic standard of value must be withdrawn from
all things and attacked beneath every disguise ... for instance, from
modern sociology, music, and Pessimism (all forms of the Christian
ideal of values).

Either one thing or the other is true--that is to say, tending to
elevate the type man....

The priest, the shepherd of souls, should be looked upon as a form
of life which must be suppressed. All education, hitherto, has been
helpless, adrift, without ballast, and afflicted with the contradiction
of values.

Either one thing or the other is true--that is to say, tending to
elevate the type man....

The priest, the shepherd of souls, should be looked upon as a form
of life which must be suppressed. All education, hitherto, has been
helpless, adrift, without ballast, and afflicted with the contradiction
of values.

If Nature have no pity on the degenerate, it is not therefore
immoral: the growth of physiological and moral evils in the human
race, is rather the result of morbid and unnatural morality. The
sensitiveness of the majority of men is both morbid and unnatural.

Why is it that mankind is corrupt in a moral and physiological respect?
The body degenerates if one organ is unsound. The right of altruism
cannot be traced to physiology, neither can the right to help and
to the equality of fate: these are all premiums for degenerates and
failures.

There can be no solidarity in a society containing unfruitful,
unproductive, and destructive members, who, by the bye, are bound to
have offspring even more degenerate than they are themselves.

Decadence exercises a profound and perfectly unconscious influence,
even over the ideals of science: all our sociology is a proof of this
proposition, and it has yet to be reproached with the fact that
it has only the experience of society in the process of decay,
and inevitably takes its own decaying instincts as the basis of
sociological judgment.

The declining vitality of modern Europe formulates its social ideals
in its decaying instincts: and these ideals are all so like those of
old and effete races, that they might be mistaken for one another.

The gregarious instinct, then,--now a sovereign power,--is something
totally different from the instinct of an aristocratic society: and
the value of the sum depends upon the value of the units constituting
it.... The whole of our sociology knows no other instinct than that
of the herd, i.e., of a multitude of mere ciphers--of which every
cipher has "equal rights," and where it is a virtue to be----naught....

The valuation with which the various forms of society are judged to-day
is absolutely the same with that which assigns a higher place to peace
than to war: but this principle is contrary to the teaching of biology,
and is itself a mere outcome of decadent life. Life is a result of war,
society is a means to war.... Mr. Herbert Spencer was a decadent in
biology, as also in morality (he regarded the triumph of altruism as a
desideratum!!!).

After thousands of years of error and confusion, it is my good fortune
to have rediscovered the road which leads to a Yea and to a Nay.

I teach people to say Nay in the face of all that makes for weakness
and exhaustion.

I teach people to say Yea in the face of all that makes for strength,
that preserves strength, and justifies the feeling of strength.

Up to the present, neither the one nor the other has been taught; but
rather virtue, disinterestedness, pity, and even the negation of life.
All these are values proceeding from exhausted people.

After having pondered over the physiology of exhaustion for some time,
I was led to the question: to what extent the judgments of exhausted
people had percolated into the world of values.

The result at which I arrived was as startling as it could possibly
be--even for one like myself who was already at home in many a strange
world: I found that all prevailing values--that is to say, all those
which had gained ascendancy over humanity, or at least over its tamer
portions, could be traced back to the judgment of exhausted people.

Under the cover of the holiest names, I found the most destructive
tendencies; people had actually given the name "God" to all that
renders weak, teaches weakness, and infects with weakness.... I found
that the "good man" was a form of self-affirmation on the part of
decadence.

That virtue which Schopenhauer still proclaimed as superior to all,
and as the most fundamental of all virtues; even that same pity I
recognised as more dangerous than any vice. Deliberately to thwart
the law of selection among species, and their natural means of purging
their stock of degenerate members--this, up to my time, had been the
greatest of all virtues....

One should do honour to the fatality which says to the feeble:
"perish!"

The opposing of this fatality, the botching of mankind and the allowing
of it to putrefy, was given the name "God" One shall not take the name
of the Lord one's God in vain....

The race is corrupted--not by its vices, but by its ignorance: it is
corrupted because it has not recognised exhaustion as exhaustion:
physiological misunderstandings are the cause of all evil.

Virtue is our greatest misunderstanding.

Problem: how were the exhausted able to make the laws of values? In
other words, how did they who are the last, come to power?... How did
the instincts of the animal man ever get to stand on their heads?...

THE CRISIS: NIHILISM AND THE IDEA OF RECURRENCE.

Extreme positions are not relieved by more moderate ones, but by
extreme opposite positions. And thus the belief in the utter
immorality of nature, and in the absence of all purpose and sense, are
psychologically necessary attitudes when the belief in God and in an
essentially moral order of things is no longer tenable.

Nihilism now appears, not because the sorrows of existence are
greater than they were formerly, but because, in a general way, people
have grown suspicious of the "meaning" which might be given to evil and
even to existence. One interpretation has been overthrown: but since it
was held to be the interpretation, it seems as though there were no
meaning in existence at all, as though everything were in vain.

It yet remains to be shown that this "in vain!" is the character
of present Nihilism. The mistrust of our former valuations has
increased to such an extent that it has led to the question: "are
not all 'values' merely allurements prolonging the duration of the
comedy, without, however, bringing the unravelling any closer?" The
"long period of time" which has culminated in an "in vain," without
either goal or purpose, is the most paralysing of thoughts, more
particularly when one sees that one is duped without, however, being
able to resist being duped.

Let us imagine this thought in its worst form: existence, as it is,
without either a purpose or a goal, but inevitably recurring, without
an end in nonentity: "Eternal Recurrence."

This is the extremest form of Nihilism: nothing (purposelessness)
eternal!

European form of Buddhism: the energy of knowledge and of strength
drives us to such a belief. It is the most scientific of all
hypotheses. We deny final purposes. If existence had a final purpose it
would have reached it.

It should be understood that what is being aimed at, here, is a
contradiction of Pantheism: for "everything perfect, divine, eternal,"
also leads to the belief in Eternal Recurrence. Question: has this
pantheistic and affirmative attitude to all things also been made
possible by morality? At bottom only the moral God has been overcome.
Is there any sense in imagining a God "beyond good and evil"? Would
Pantheism in this sense be possible? Do we withdraw the idea of
purpose from the process, and affirm the process notwithstanding?
This were so if, within that process, something were attained every
moment--and always the same thing. Spinoza won an affirmative position
of this sort, in the sense that every moment, according to him, has
a logical necessity: and he triumphed by means of his fundamentally
logical instinct over a like conformation of the world.

But his case is exceptional. If every fundamental trait of character,
which lies beneath every act, and which finds expression in every
act, were recognised by the individual as his fundamental trait of
character, this individual would be driven to regard every moment of
his existence in general, triumphantly as good. It would simply be
necessary for that fundamental trait of character to be felt in oneself
as something good, valuable, and pleasurable.

Now, in the case of those men and classes of men who were treated
with violence and oppressed by their fellows, morality saved life
from despair and from the leap into nonentity:. for impotence in
relation to mankind and not in relation to Nature is what generates
the most desperate bitterness towards existence. Morality treated the
powerful, the violent, and the "masters" in general, as enemies against
whom the common man must be protected--that is to say, emboldened,
strengthened. Morality has therefore always taught the most profound
hatred and contempt of the fundamental trait of character of all
rulers--i.e., their Will to Power. To suppress, to deny, and to
decompose this morality, would mean to regard this most thoroughly
detested instinct with the reverse of the old feeling and valuation.
If the sufferer and the oppressed man were to lose his belief in his
right to contemn the Will to Power, his position would be desperate.
This would be so if the trait above-mentioned were essential to life,
in which case it would follow that even that will to morality was only
a cloak to this "Will to Power," as are also even that hatred and
contempt. The oppressed man would then perceive that he stands on
the same platform with the oppressor, and that he has no individual
privilege, nor any higher rank than the latter.

On the contrary! There is nothing on earth which can have any value,
if it have not a modicum of power--granted, of course, that life itself
is the Will to Power. Morality protected the botched and bungled
against Nihilism, in that it gave every one of them infinite worth,
metaphysical worth, and classed them altogether in one order which did
not correspond with that of worldly power and order of rank: it taught
submission, humility, etc. Admitting that the belief in this morality
be destroyed, the botched and the bungled would no longer have any
comfort, and would perish.

This perishing seems like self-annihilation, like an instinctive
selection of that which must be destroyed. The symptoms of this
self-destruction of the botched and the bungled: self-vivisection,
poisoning, intoxication, romanticism, and, above all, the instinctive
constraint to acts whereby the powerful are made into mortal
enemies (training, so to speak, one's own hangmen), the will to
destruction as the will of a still deeper instinct--of the instinct of
self-destruction, of the Will to Nonentity.

Nihilism is a sign that the botched and bungled in order to be
destroyed, that, having been deprived of morality, they no longer have
any reason to "resign themselves," that they take up their stand on the
territory of the opposite principle, and will also exercise power
themselves, by compelling the powerful to become their hangmen. This
is the European form of Buddhism, that active negation, after all
existence has lost its meaning.

It must not be supposed that "poverty" has grown more acute, on the
contrary! "God, morality, resignation" were remedies in the very
deepest stages of misery: active Nihilism made its appearance in
circumstances which were relatively much more favourable. The fact,
alone, that morality is regarded as overcome, presupposes a certain
degree of intellectual culture; while this very culture, for its part,
bears evidence to a certain relative well-being. A certain intellectual
fatigue, brought on by the long struggle concerning philosophical
opinions, and carried to hopeless scepticism against philosophy,
shows moreover that the level of these Nihilists is by no means a
low one. Only think of the conditions in which Buddha appeared! The
teaching of the eternal recurrence would have learned principles to
go upon (just as Buddha's teaching, for instance, had the notion of
causality, etc.).

What do we mean to-day by the words "botched and bungled"? In the
first place, they are used physiologically and not politically. The
unhealthiest kind of man all over Europe (in all classes) is the soil
out of which Nihilism grows: this species of man will regard eternal
recurrence as damnation--once he is bitten by the thought, he can no
longer recoil before any action. He would not extirpate passively,
but would cause everything to be extirpated which is meaningless
and without a goal to this extent; although it is only a spasm, or
sort of blind rage in the presence of the fact that everything has
existed again and again for an eternity--even this period of Nihilism
and destruction. The value of such a crisis is that it purifies,
that it unites similar elements, and makes them mutually destructive,
that it assigns common duties to men of opposite persuasions, and
brings the weaker and more uncertain among them to the light, thus
taking the first step towards a new order of rank among forces
from the standpoint of health: recognising commanders as commanders,
subordinates as subordinates. Naturally irrespective of all the present
forms of society.

What class of men will prove they are strongest in this new order of
things? The most moderate--they who do not require any extreme forms
of belief, they who not only admit of, but actually like, a certain
modicum of chance and nonsense; they who can think of man with a very
moderate view of his value, without becoming weak and small on that
account; the most rich in health, who are able to withstand a maximum
amount of sorrow, and who are therefore not so very much afraid of
sorrow--men who are certain of their power, and who represent with
conscious pride the state of strength to which man has attained.

How could such a man think of Eternal Recurrence?

The Periods of European Nihilism.

The Period of Obscurity: all kinds of groping measures devised to
preserve old institutions and not to arrest the progress of new ones.

The Period of Light: men see that old and new are fundamental
contraries; that the old values are born of descending life, and that
the new ones are born of ascending life--that all old ideals are
unfriendly to life (born of decadence and determining it, however
much they may be decked out in the Sunday finery of morality). We
understand the old, but are far from being sufficiently strong for
the new.

The Periods of the Three Great Passions: contempt, pity, destruction.

The Periods of Catastrophes: the rise of a teaching which will sift
mankind ... which drives the weak to some decision and the strong also.

II.

CONCERNING THE HISTORY OF EUROPEAN NIHILISM.

MODERN GLOOMINESS.

My friends, we had a hard time as youths; we even suffered from
youth itself as though it were a serious disease. This is owing to
the age in which we were born--an age of enormous internal decay and
disintegration which, with all its weakness and even with the best of
its strength, is opposed to the spirit of youth. Disintegration--that
is to say, uncertainty--is peculiar to this age: nothing stands on
solid ground or on a sound faith. People live for the morrow, because
the day-after-to-morrow is doubtful. All our road is slippery and
dangerous, while the ice which still bears us has grown unconscionably
thin: we all feel the mild and gruesome breath of the thaw-wind--soon,
where we are walking, no one will any longer be able to stand!

If this is not an age of decay and of diminishing vitality, it is at
least one of indiscriminate and arbitrary experimentalising--and it is
probable that out of an excess of abortive experiments there has grown
this general impression, as of decay: and perhaps decay itself.

Concerning the history of modern gloominess.

The state-nomads (officials, etc.): "homeless"--.

The break-up of the family.

The "good man" as a symptom of exhaustion.

Justice as Will to Power (Rearing).

Lewdness and neurosis.

Black music: whither has real music gone?

The anarchist.

Contempt of man, loathing.

Most profound distinction: whether hunger or satiety is creative? The
first creates the Ideals of Romanticism.

Northern unnaturalness.

The need of Alcohol: the "need" of the working classes.

Philosophical Nihilism.

The slow advance and rise of the middle and lower classes (including
the lower kind of spirit and body), which was already well under way
before the French Revolution, and would have made the same progress
forward without the latter,--in short, then, the preponderance of the
herd over all herdsmen and bell-wethers,--brings in its train:--

Gloominess of spirit (the juxtaposition of a stoical and a
frivolous appearance of happiness, peculiar to noble cultures, is on
the decline; much suffering is allowed to be seen and heard which
formerly was borne in concealment);

Moral hypocrisy (a way of distinguishing oneself through
morality, but by means of the values of the herd: pity, solicitude,
moderation; and not by means of those virtues which are recognised and
honoured outside the herd's sphere of power);

A really large amount of sympathy with both pain and joy (a
feeling of pleasure resulting from being herded together, which is
peculiar to all gregarious animals--"public spirit," "patriotism,"
everything, in fact, which is apart from the individual).

Our age, with its indiscriminate endeavours to mitigate distress, to
honour it, and to wage war in advance with unpleasant possibilities, is
an age of the poor. Our "rich people"--they are the poorest! The
real purpose of all wealth has been forgotten.

Criticism of modern man:--"the good man," but corrupted and misled by
bad institutions (tyrants and priests);--reason elevated to a position
of authority;--history is regarded as the surmounting of errors;--the
future is regarded as progress;--the Christian state ("God of the
armies");--Christian sexual intercourse (as marriage);--the realm of
"justice" (the cult of "mankind");--"freedom."

The romantic attitudes of the modern man;--the noble man
(Byron, Victor Hugo, George Sand);--taking the part of the
oppressed and the bungled and the botched: motto for historians and
romancers;--the Stoics of duty;--disinterestedness regarded as art
and as knowledge;--altruism as the most mendacious form of egoism
(utilitarianism), the most sentimental form of egoism.

All this savours of the eighteenth century. But it had other
qualities which were not inherited, namely, a certain insouciance,
cheerfulness, elegance, spiritual clearness. The spiritual tempo has
altered; the pleasure which was begotten by spiritual refinement and
clearness has given room to the pleasure of colour, harmony, mass,
reality, etc. etc. Sensuality in spiritual things. In short, it is the
eighteenth century of Rousseau.

Taken all in all, a considerable amount of humanity has been attained
by our men of to-day. That we feel this is in itself a proof of the
fact that we have become so sensitive in regard to small cases of
distress, that we somewhat unjustly overlook what has been achieved.

Here we must make allowances for the fact that a great deal of
decadence is rife, and that, through such eyes, our world must appear
bad and wretched. But these eyes have always seen in the same way, in
all ages.

A certain hypersensitiveness, even in morality.

The quantum of bitterness and gloominess, which pessimism bears
with it in its judgments--both together have helped to bring about the
preponderance of the other and opposite point of view, that things
are not well with our morality.

The fact of credit, of the commerce of the world, and the means of
traffic--are expressions of an extraordinarily mild trustfulness in
men.... To that may also be added--

The deliverance of science from moral and religious prejudices: a
very good sign, though for the most part misunderstood.

In my own way, I am attempting a justification of history.

The second appearance of Buddhism.--Its precursory signs: the
increase of pity. Spiritual exhaustion. The reduction of all
problems to the question of pleasure and pain. The glory of war
which calls forth a counter-stroke. Just as the sharp demarcation of
nations generates a counter-movement in the form of the most hearty
"Fraternity." The fact that it is impossible for religion to carry on
its work any longer with dogma and fables.

The catastrophe of Nihilism will put an end to all this Buddhistic
culture.

That which is most sorely afflicted to-day is the instinct and will of
tradition: all institutions which owe their origin to this instinct,
are opposed to the tastes of the age.... At bottom, nothing is thought
or done which is not calculated to tear up this spirit of tradition
by the roots. Tradition is looked upon as a fatality; it is studied
and acknowledged (in the form of "heredity"), but people will not have
anything to do with it. The extension of one will over long periods
of time, the selection of conditions and valuations which make it
possible to dispose of centuries in advance--this, precisely, is what
is most utterly anti-modern. From which it follows, that disorganising
principles give our age its specific character.

"Be simple"--a demand which, when made to us complicated and
incomprehensible triers of the heart and reins, is a simple
absurdity.... Be natural: but even if we are unnatural--what then?

The means employed in former times in order to arrive at similarly
constituted and lasting types, throughout long generations: entailed
property and the respect of parents (the origin of the faith in gods
and heroes as ancestors).

Now, the subdivision of property belongs to the opposite tendency.
The centralisation of an enormous number of, different interests in one
soul: which, to that end, must be very strong and mutable.

Why does everything become mummery.--The modern man is lacking in
unfailing instinct (instinct being understood here to mean that which
is the outcome of a long period of activity in the same occupation on
the part of one family of men); the incapability of producing anything
perfect, is simply the result of this lack of instinct: one individual
alone cannot make up for the schooling his ancestors should have
transmitted to him.

What a morality or book of law creates: that deep instinct which
renders automatism and perfection possible in life and in work.

But now we have reached the opposite point; yes, we wanted to reach
it--the most extreme consciousness, through introspection on the part
of man and of history: and thus we are practically most distant from
perfection in Being, doing, and willing: our desires--even our will
to knowledge--shows how prodigiously decadent we are. We are striving
after the very reverse of what strong races and strong natures will
have--understanding is an end....

That Science is possible in the way in which it is practised to-day,
proves that all elementary instincts, the instincts which ward off
danger and protect life, are no longer active. We no longer save, we
are merely spending the capital of our forefathers, even in the way in
which we pursue knowledge.

Nihilistic trait.

In the natural sciences ("purposelessness"), causality,
mechanism, "conformity to law," an interval, a remnant.

Likewise in politics: the individual lacks the belief in his
own right, innocence; falsehood rules supreme, as also the worship of
the moment.

Likewise in political economy: the abolition of slavery: the
lack of a redeeming class, and of one who justifies--the rise of
anarchy. "Education"?

Likewise in history: fatalism, Darwinism; the last attempts at
reconciling reason and Godliness fail. Sentimentality in regard to the
past: biographies can no longer be endured! (Phenomenalism even here:
character regarded as a mask; there are no facts.)

Likewise in Art: romanticism and its counter-stroke
(repugnance towards romantic ideals and lies). The latter, morally,
as a sense of greatest truthfulness, but pessimistic. Pure "artists"
(indifference as to the "subject"). (The psychology of the
father-confessor and puritanical psychology--two forms of psychological
romanticism: but also their counter-stroke, the attempt to maintain a
purely artistic attitude towards "men"--but even in this respect no one
dares to make the opposite valuation.)

Against the teaching of the influence of environment and external
causes: the power coming from inside is infinitely superior;
much that appears like influence acting from without is merely the
subjection of environment to this inner power.

Precisely the same environment may be used and interpreted in opposite
ways: there are no facts. A genius is not explained by such theories
concerning origins.

"Modernity" regarded in the light of nutrition and digestion.

Sensitiveness is infinitely more acute (beneath moral vestments: the
increase of pity), the abundance of different impressions is greater
than ever. The cosmopolitanism of articles of diet, of literature,
newspapers, forms, tastes, and even landscapes. The speed of this
affluence is prestissimo; impressions are wiped out, and people
instinctively guard against assimilating anything or against taking
anything seriously and "digesting" it; the result is a weakening of
the powers of digestion. There begin a sort of adaptation to this
accumulation of impressions. Man unlearns the art of doing, and
all he does is to react to stimuli coming from his environment. He
spends his strength, partly in the process of assimilation, partly
in defending himself, and again partly in responding to stimuli.
Profound enfeeblement of spontaneity:--the historian, the critic, the
analyst, the interpreter, the observer, the collector, the reader,--all
reactive talents,--all science!

Artificial modification of one's own nature in order to make it
resemble a "mirror"; one is interested, but only epidermally: this
is systematic coolness, equilibrium, a steady low temperature,
just beneath the thin surface on which warmth, movement, "storm," and
undulations play.

Opposition of external mobility to a certain dead heaviness and
fatigue.

Where must our modern world be classed--under exhaustion or under
increasing strength? Its multiformity and lack of repose are brought
about by the highest form of consciousness.

Overwork, curiosity and sympathy--our modern vices.

A contribution to the characterisation of "Modernity."--Exaggerated
development of intermediate forms; the decay of types; the break-up of
tradition, schools; the predominance of the instincts (philosophically
prepared: the unconscious has the greater value) after the appearance
of the enfeeblement of will power and of the will to an end and to
the means thereto.

A capable artisan or scholar cuts a good figure if he have his pride
in his art, and looks pleasantly and contentedly upon life. On the
other hand, there is no sight more wretched than that of a cobbler or
a schoolmaster who, with the air of a martyr, gives one to understand
that he was really born for something better. There is nothing better
than what is good! and that is: to have a certain kind of capacity and
to use it. This is virtu in the Italian style of the Renaissance.

Nowadays, when the state has a nonsensically oversized belly, in all
fields and branches of work there are "representatives" over and above
the real workman: for instance, in addition to the scholars, there
are the journalists; in addition to the suffering masses, there is a
crowd of jabbering and bragging ne'er-do-wells who "represent" that
suffering--not to speak of the professional politicians who, though
quite satisfied with their lot, stand up in Parliament and, with
strong lungs, "represent" grievances. Our modern life is extremely
expensive, thanks to the host of middlemen that infest it; whereas
in the city of antiquity, and in many a city of Spain and Italy
to-day, where there is an echo of the ancient spirit, the man himself
comes forward and will have nothing to do with a representative or an
intermediary in the modern style--except perhaps to kick him hence!

The pre-eminence of the merchant and the middleman, even in the
most intellectual spheres: the journalist, the "representative," the
historian (as an intermediary between the past and the present), the
exotic and cosmopolitan, the middleman between natural science and
philosophy, the semi-theologians.

The men I have regarded with the most loathing, heretofore, are the
parasites of intellect: they are to be found everywhere, already, in
our modern Europe, and as a matter of fact their conscience is as light
as it possibly can be. They may be a little turbid, and savour somewhat
of Pessimism, but in the main they are voracious, dirty, dirtying,
stealthy, insinuating, light-fingered gentry, scabby--and as innocent
as all small sinners and microbes are. They live at the expense of
those who have intellect and who distribute it liberally: they know
that it is peculiar to the rich mind to live in a disinterested
fashion, without taking too much petty thought for the morrow, and
to distribute its wealth prodigally. For intellect is a bad domestic
economist, and pays no heed whatever to the fact that everything lives
on it and devours it.

MODERN MUMMERY

The motleyness of modern men and its charm Essentially a mask and a
sign of boredom.

The journalist.

The political man (in the "national swindle").

Mummery in the arts:--

The lack of honesty in preparing and schooling oneself for
them (Fromentin);

The Romanticists (their lack of philosophy and science and
their excess in literature);

The novelists (Walter Scott, but also the monsters of the
Nibelung, with their inordinately nervous music);

The lyricists.

"Scientifically."

Virtuosos (Jews).

The popular ideals are overcome, but not yet in the presence of the
people:

The saint, the sage, the prophet.

The want of discipline in the modern spirit concealed beneath all
kinds of moral finery.--The show-words are: Toleration (for the
"incapacity of saying yes or no"); la largeur de sympathie (= a
third of indifference, a third of curiosity, and a third of morbid
susceptibility); "objectivity" (the lack of personality and of
will, and the inability to "love"); "freedom" in regard to the rule
(Romanticism); "truth" as opposed to falsehood and lying (Naturalism);
the "scientific spirit" (the "human document": or, in plain English,
the serial story which means "addition"--instead of "composition");
"passion" in the place of disorder and intemperance; "depth" in the
place of confusion and the pell-mell of symbols.

Concerning the criticism of big words.--I am full of mistrust and
malice towards what is called "ideal": this is my Pessimism, that
I have recognised to what extent "sublime sentiments" are a source of
evil--that is to say, a belittling and depreciating of man.

Every time "progress" is expected to result from an ideal,
disappointment invariably follows; the triumph of an ideal has always
been a retrograde movement.

Christianity, revolution, the abolition of slavery, equal rights,
philanthropy, love of peace, justice, truth: all these big words are
only valuable in a struggle, as banners: not as realities, but as
show-words, for something quite different (yea, even quite opposed to
what they mean!).

The kind of man is known who has fallen in love with the sentence
"tout comprendre a est tout pardonner" It is the weak and, above all,
the disillusioned: if there is something to pardon in everything, there
is also something to contemn! It is the philosophy of disappointment,
which here swathes itself so humanly in pity, and gazes out so sweetly.

They are Romanticists, whose faith has gone to pot: now they at least
wish to look on and see how everything vanishes and fades. They call it
l'art pour l'art, "objectivity," etc.

The main symptoms of Pessimism:--Dinners at Magny's; Russian
Pessimism (Tolstoy, Dostoiewsky); aesthetic Pessimism, l'art pour
l'art, "description" (the romantic and the anti-romantic Pessimism);
Pessimism in the theory of knowledge (Schopenhauer: phenomenalism);
anarchical Pessimism; the "religion of pity," Buddhistic preparation;
the Pessimism of culture (exoticness, cosmopolitanism); moral
Pessimism, myself.

"Without the Christian Faith" said Pascal, "you would yourselves
be like nature and history, un monstre et un chaos." We fulfilled
this prophecy: once the weak and optimistic eighteenth century had
embellished and rationalised man.

Schopenhauer and Pascal.--I none essential point, Schopenhauer is
the first who takes up Pascal's movement again: un monstre et un
chaos, consequently something that must be negatived ... history,
nature, and man himself!

"Our inability to know the truth is the result of our corruption,
of our moral decay" says Pascal. And Schopenhauer says essentially
the same. "The more profound the corruption of reason is, the
more necessary is the doctrine of salvation"--or, putting it into
Schopenhauerian phraseology, negation.

Schopenhauer as an epigone (state of affairs before the
Revolution):--Pity, sensuality, art, weakness of will, Catholicism
of the most intellectual desires--that is, at bottom, the good old
eighteenth century.

Schopenhauer's fundamental misunderstanding of the will (just
as though passion, instinct, and desire were the essential factors
of will) is typical: the depreciation of the will to the extent of
mistaking it altogether. Likewise the hatred of willing: the attempt at
seeing something superior--yea, even superiority itself, and that which
really matters, in non-willing, in the "subject-being without aim or
intention." Great symptom of fatigue or of the weakness of will: for
this, in reality, is what treats the passions as master, and directs
them as to the way and to the measure....

The undignified attempt has been made to regard Wagner and Schopenhauer
as types of the mentally unsound: an infinitely more essential
understanding of the matter would have been gained if the exact
decadent type which each of them represents had been scientifically and
accurately defined.

In my opinion, Henrik Ibsen has become very German. With all his
robust idealism and "Will to Truth," he never dared to ring himself
free from moral-illusionism which says "freedom," and will not admit,
even to itself, what freedom is: the second stage in the metamorphosis
of the "Will to Power" in him who lacks it. In the first stage, one
demands justice at the hands of those who have power. In the second,
one speaks of "freedom," that is to say, one wishes to "shake oneself
free" from those who have power. In the third stage, one speaks of
"equal rights"--that is to say, so long as one is not a predominant
personality one wishes to prevent one's competitors from growing in
power.

The Decline of Protestantism: theoretically and historically
understood as a half-measure. Undeniable predominance of Catholicism
to-day: Protestant feeling is so dead that the strongest
anti-Protestant movements (Wagner's Parsifal, for instance) are no
longer regarded as such. The whole of the more elevated intellectuality
in France is Catholic in instinct; Bismarck recognised that there was
no longer any such thing as Protestantism.

Protestantism, that spiritually unclean and tiresome form of decadence,
in which Christianity has known how to survive in the mediocre North,
is something incomplete and complexly valuable for knowledge, in so far
as it was able to bring experiences of different kinds and origins into
the same heads.

What has the German spirit not made out of Christianity! And, to refer
to Protestantism again, how much beer is there not still in Protestant
Christianity! Can a crasser, more indolent, and more lounging form
of Christian belief be imagined, than that of the average German
Protestant?... It is indeed a very humble Christianity. I call it
the Homoeopathy of Christianity! I am reminded that, to-day, there
also exists a less humble sort of Protestantism; it is taught by
royal chaplains and anti-Semitic speculators: but nobody has ever
maintained that any "spirit" "hovers" over these waters. It is merely
a less respectable form of Christian faith, not by any means a more
comprehensible one.

Progress.--Let us be on our guard lest we deceive ourselves! Time
flies forward apace,--we would fain believe that everything flies
forward with it,--that evolution is an advancing development.... That
is the appearance of things which deceives the most circumspect. But
the nineteenth century shows no advance whatever on the sixteenth:
and the German spirit of 1888 is an example of a backward movement
when compared with that of 1788.... Mankind does not advance, it does
not even exist. The aspect of the whole is much more like that of a
huge experimenting workshop where some things in all ages succeed,
while an incalculable number of things fail; where all order, logic,
co-ordination, and responsibility is lacking. How dare we blink the
fact that the rise of Christianity is a decadent movement?--that the
German Reformation was a recrudescence of Christian barbarism?--that
the Revolution destroyed the instinct for an organisation of society
on a large scale?... Man is not an example of progress as compared with
animals: the tender son of culture is an abortion compared with the
Arab or the Corsican; the Chinaman is a more successful type--that is
to say, richer in sustaining power than the European.

THE LAST CENTURIES.

Gloominess and pessimistic influence necessarily follow in the wake of
enlightenment. Towards 1770 a falling-off in cheerfulness was already
noticeable; women, with that very feminine instinct which always
defends virtue, believed that immorality was the cause of it. Galiani
hit the bull's eye: he quotes Voltaire's verse:

"Un monstre gai vaut mieux
Qu'un sentimental ennuyeux."

If now I maintain that I am ahead, by a century or two of
enlightenment, of Voltaire and Galiani--who was much more profound, how
deeply must I have sunk into gloominess! This is also true, and betimes
I somewhat reluctantly manifested some caution in regard to the German
and Christian narrowness and inconsistency of Schopenhauerian or, worse
still, Leopardian Pessimism, and sought the most characteristic form
(Asia). But, in order to endure that extreme Pessimism (which here and
there peeps out of my Birth of Tragedy), to live alone "without God
or morality," I was compelled to invent a counter-prop for myself.
Perhaps I know best why man is the only animal that laughs: he alone
surfers so excruciatingly that he was compelled to invent laughter.
The unhappiest and most melancholy animal is, as might have been
expected, the most cheerful.

In regard to German culture, I have always had a feeling as of
decline. The fact that I learned to know a declining form of culture
has often made me unfair towards the whole phenomenon of European
culture. The Germans always follow at some distance behind: they always
go to the root of things, for instance:--

Dependance upon foreigners; Kant--Rousseau, the sensualists, Hume,
Swedenborg.

Schopenhauer--the Indians and Romanticism, Voltaire.

Wagner--the French cult of the ugly and of grand opera, Paris, and
the flight into primitive barbarism (the marriage of brother and
sister).

The law of the laggard (the provinces go to Paris, Germany goes to
France).

How is it that precisely Germans discovered the Greek (the more an
instinct is developed, the more it is tempted to run for once into
its opposite).

Music is the last breath of every culture.

Renaissance and Reformation.--What does the Renaissance prove? That
the reign of the "individual" can be only a short one. The output
is too great; there is not even the possibility of husbanding or of
capitalising forces, and exhaustion sets in step by step. These are
times when everything is squandered, when even the strength itself
with which one collects, capitalises, and heaps riches upon riches,
is squandered. Even the opponents of such movements are driven to
preposterous extremes in the dissipation of their strength: and they
too are very soon exhausted, used up, and completely sapped.

In the Reformation we are face to face with a wild and plebeian
counterpart of the Italian Renaissance, generated by similar impulses,
except that the former, in the backward and still vulgar North, had to
assume a religious form--there the concept of a higher life had not yet
been divorced from that of a religious one.

Even the Reformation was a movement for individual liberty; "every one
his own priest" is really no more than a formula for libertinage.
As a matter of fact, the words "Evangelical freedom" would have
sufficed--and all instincts which had reasons for remaining concealed
broke out like wild hounds, the most brutal needs suddenly acquired the
courage to show themselves, everything seemed justified ... men refused
to specify the kind of freedom they had aimed at, they preferred to
shut their eyes. But the fact that their eyes were closed and that
their lips were moistened with gushing orations, did not prevent their
hands from being ready to snatch at whatever there was to snatch at,
that the belly became the god of the "free gospel," and that all lusts
of revenge and of hatred were indulged with insatiable fury.

This lasted for a while: then exhaustion supervened, just as it
had done in Southern Europe; and again here, it was a low form of
exhaustion, a sort of general ruere in servitium.... Then the
disreputable century of Germany dawned.

Chivalry--the position won by power: its gradual break-up (and
partial transference to broader and more bourgeois spheres). In the
case of Larochefoucauld we find a knowledge of the actual impulses of a
noble temperament--together with the gloomy Christian estimate of these
impulses.

The protraction of Christianity through the French Revolution. The
seducer is Rousseau; he once again liberates woman, who thenceforward
is always represented as ever more interesting--suffering. Then come
the slaves and Mrs. Beecher-Stowe. Then the poor and the workmen.
Then the vicious and the sick--all this is drawn into the foreground
(even for the purpose of disposing people in favour of the genius,
it has been customary for five hundred years to press him forward as
the great sufferer!). Then comes the cursing of all voluptuousness
(Baudelaire and Schopenhauer), the most decided conviction that the
lust of power is the greatest vice; absolute certainty that morality
and disinterestedness are identical things; that the "happiness of all"
is a goal worth striving after (i.e., Christ's Kingdom of Heaven).
We are on the best road to it: the Kingdom of Heaven of the poor in
spirit has begun.--Intermediate stages: the bourgeois (as a result of
the nouveau riche) and the workman (as a result of the machine).

Greek and French culture of the time of Louis XIV. compared. A decided
belief in oneself. A leisure-class which makes things hard for itself
and exercises a great deal of self-control. The power of form, the will
to form oneself. "Happiness" acknowledged as a purpose. Much strength
and energy behind all formality of manners. Pleasure at the sight of
a life that is seemingly so easy. The Greeks seemed like children
to the French.

The Three Centuries.

Their different kinds of sensitiveness may perhaps be best expressed
as follows:--

Aristocracy: Descartes, the reign of reason, evidence showing the
sovereignty of the will.

Feminism: Rousseau, the reign of feeling, evidence showing the
sovereignty of the senses; all lies.

Animalism: Schopenhauer, the reign of passion, evidence showing the
sovereignty of animality, more honest, but gloomy.

The seventeenth century is aristocratic, all for order, haughty
towards everything animal, severe in regard to the heart, "austere,"
and even free from sentiment, "non-German," averse to all that is
burlesque and natural, generalising and maintaining an attitude of
sovereignty towards the past for it believes in itself. At bottom it
partakes very much of the beast of prey, and practises asceticism in
order to remain master. It is the century of strength of will, as also
that of strong passion.

The eighteenth century is dominated by woman, it is gushing,
spiritual, and flat; but with intellect at the service of aspirations
and of the heart, it is a libertine in the pleasures of intellect,
undermining all authorities; emotionally intoxicated, cheerful, clear,
humane, and sociable, false to itself and at bottom very rascally....

The nineteenth century is more animal, more subterranean, hateful,
realistic, plebeian, and on that very account "better," "more honest,"
more submissive to "reality" of what kind soever, and truer; but
weak of will, sad, obscurely exacting and fatalistic. It has no
feeling of timidity or reverence, either in the presence of "reason"
or the "heart"; thoroughly convinced of the dominion of the desires
(Schopenhauer said "Will," but nothing is more characteristic of his
philosophy than that it entirely lacks all actual willing). Even
morality is reduced to an instinct ("Pity").

Auguste Comte is the continuation of the eighteenth century (the
dominion of the heart over the head, sensuality in the theory of
knowledge, altruistic exaltation).

The fact that science has become as sovereign as it is to-day, proves
how the nineteenth century has emancipated itself from the dominion
of ideals. A certain absence of "needs" and wishes makes our
scientific curiosity and rigour possible--this is our kind of virtue.

Romanticism is the counterstroke of the eighteenth century; a sort of
accumulated longing for its grand style of exaltation (as a matter of
fact, largely mingled with mummery and self-deception: the desire was
to represent strong nature and strong passion).

The nineteenth century instinctively goes in search of theories
by means of which it may feel its fatalistic, submission to the
empire of facts justified. Hegel's success against sentimentality
and romantic idealism was already a sign of its fatalistic trend of
thought, in its belief that superior reason belongs to the triumphant
side, and in its justification of the actual "state" (in the place of
"humanity," etc.).--Schopenhauer: we are something foolish, and at the
best self-suppressive. The success of determinism, the genealogical
derivation of obligations which were formerly held to be absolute,
the teaching of environment and adaptation, the reduction of will to
a process of reflex movement, the denial of the will as a "working
cause"; finally--a real process of re-christening: so little will
is observed that the word itself becomes available for another
purpose. Further theories: the teaching of objectivity, "will-less"
contemplation, as the only road to truth, as also to beauty (also
the belief in "genius," in order to have the right to be submissive);
mechanism, the determinable rigidity of the mechanical process;
so-called "Naturalism," the elimination of the choosing, directing,
interpreting subject, on principle.

Kant, with his "practical reason," with his moral fanaticism, is
quite eighteenth century style; still completely outside the historical
movement, without any notion whatsoever of the reality of his time, for
instance, revolution; he is not affected by Greek philosophy; he is a
phantasist of the notion of duty, a sensualist with a hidden leaning to
dogmatic pampering.

The return to Kant in our century means a return to the eighteenth
century, people desire to create themselves a right to the old ideas
and to the old exaltation--hence a theory of knowledge which "describes
limits," that is to say, which admits of the option of fixing a Beyond
to the domain of reason.

Hegel's way of thinking is not so very far removed from that of
Goethe: see the latter on the subject of Spinoza, for instance.
The will to deify the All and Life, in order to find both peace
and happiness in contemplating them: Hegel looks for reason
everywhere--in the presence of reason man may be submissive and
resigned. In Goethe we find a kind of fatalism which is almost
joyous and confiding, which neither revolts nor weakens, which
strives to make a totality out of itself, in the belief that only in
totality does everything seem good and justified, and find itself
resolved.

The period of rationalism--followed by a period of sentimentality.
To what extent does Schopenhauer come under "sentimentality"? (Hegel
under intellectuality?)

The seventeenth century suffers from humanity as from a host
of contradictions ("l'amas de contradictions" that we are); it
endeavours to discover man, to co-ordinate him, to excavate him:
whereas the eighteenth century tries to forget what is known of man's
nature, in order to adapt him to its Utopia. "Superficial, soft,
humane"--gushes over "humanity."

The seventeenth century tries to banish all traces of the individual
in order that the artist's work may resemble life as much as possible.
The eighteenth century strives to create interest in the author by
means of the work. The seventeenth century seeks art in art, a piece of
culture; the eighteenth uses art in its propaganda for political and
social reforms.

"Utopia," the "ideal man," the deification of Nature, the vanity of
making one's own personality the centre of interest, subordination to
the propaganda of social ideas, charlatanism--all this we derive from
the eighteenth century.

The style of the seventeenth century: propre exact et libre.

The strong individual who is self-sufficient, or who appeals
ardently to God--and that obtrusiveness and indiscretion of modern
authors--these things are opposites. "Showing-oneself-off"--what a
contrast to the Scholars of Port-Royal!

Alfieri had a sense for the grand style.

The hate of the burlesque (that which lacks dignity), the lack of a
sense of Nature belongs to the seventeenth century.

Against Rousseau.--Alas! man is no longer sufficiently evil;
Rousseau's opponents, who say that "man is a beast of prey," are
unfortunately wrong. Not the corruption of man, but the softening and
moralising of him is the curse. In the sphere which Rousseau attacked
most violently, the relatively strongest and most successful type of
man was still to be found (the type which still possessed the great
passions intact: Will to Power, Will to Pleasure, the Will and Ability
to Command). The man of the eighteenth century must be compared with
the man of the Renaissance (also with the man of the seventeenth
century in France) if the matter is to be understood at all: Rousseau
is a symptom of self-contempt and of inflamed vanity--both signs that
the dominating will is lacking: he moralises and seeks the cause of
his own misery after the style of a revengeful man in the ruling
classes.

Voltaire--Rousseau.--A state of nature is terrible; man is a beast of
prey: our civilisation is an extraordinary triumph over this beast of
prey in nature--this was Voltaires conclusion. He was conscious of
the mildness, the refinements, the intellectual joys of the civilised
state; he despised obtuseness, even in the form of virtue, and the lack
of delicacy even in ascetics and monks.

The moral depravity of man seemed to pre-occupy Rousseau; the words
"unjust," "cruel," are the best possible for the purpose of exciting
the instincts of the oppressed, who otherwise find themselves under
the ban of the vetitum and of disgrace; so that their conscience
is opposed to their indulging any insurrectional desires. These
emancipators seek one thing above all: to give their party the great
accents and attitudes of higher Nature.

Rousseau; the rule founded on sentiment; Nature as the source of
justice; man perfects himself in proportion as he approaches Nature
(according to Voltaire, in proportion as he leaves Nature behind).
The very same periods seem to the one to demonstrate the progress of
humanity and, to the other, the increase of injustice and inequality.

Voltaire, who still understood umanita in the sense of the
Renaissance, as also virtu (as "higher culture"), fights for the
cause of the "honnetes gens" "la bonne compagnie" taste, science,
arts, and even for the cause of progress and civilisation.

The flare-up occurred towards 1760: On the one hand the citizen
of Geneva, on the other le seigneur de Ferney. It is only from
that moment and henceforward that Voltaire was the man of his age,
the philosopher, the representative of Toleration and of Disbelief
(theretofore he had been merely un bel esprit). His envy and hatred
of Rousseau's success forced him upwards.

"Pour 'la canaille' un dieu remunerateur et vengeur"--Voltaire.

The criticism of both standpoints in regard to the value of
civilisation. To Voltaire nothing seems finer than the social
invention: there is no higher goal than to uphold and perfect it.
L'honnetete consists precisely in respecting social usage; virtue
in a certain obedience towards various necessary "prejudices" which
favour the maintenance of society. Missionary of Culture, aristocrat,
representative of the triumphant and ruling classes and their values.
But Rousseau remained a plebeian, even as hommes de lettres, this
was preposterous; his shameless contempt for everything that was not
himself.

The morbid feature in Rousseau is the one which happens to have been
most admired and imitated. (Lord Byron resembled him somewhat, he
too screwed himself up to sublime attitudes and to revengeful rage--a
sign of vulgarity; later on, when Venice restored his equilibrium,
he understood what alleviates most and does the most good ...
l'insouciance.)

In spite of his antecedents, Rousseau is proud of himself; but he is
incensed if he is reminded of his origin....

In Rousseau there was undoubtedly some brain trouble; in Voltaire--rare
health and lightsomeness. The revengefulness of the sick; his
periods of insanity as also those of his contempt of man, and of his
mistrust.

Rousseau's defence of Providence (against Voltaire's Pessimism):
he had need of God in order to be able to curse society and
civilisation; everything must be good per se, because God had created
it; man alone has corrupted man. The "good man" as a man of Nature
was pure fantasy; but with the dogma of God's authorship he became
something probable and even not devoid of foundation.

Romanticism a la Rousseau: passion ("the sovereign right of
passion"); "naturalness"; the fascination of madness (foolishness
reckoned as greatness); the senseless vanity of the weak; the
revengefulness of the masses elevated to the position of justice
("in politics, for one hundred years, the leader has always been this
invalid").

Kant: makes the scepticism of Englishmen, in regard to the theory of
knowledge, possible for Germans.

By enlisting in its cause the interest of the German's religious
and moral needs: just as the new academicians used scepticism for the
same reasons, as a preparation for Platonism (vide Augustine); just
as Pascal even used moral scepticism in order to provoke (to justify)
the need of belief;

By complicating and entangling it with scholastic flourishes in
view of making it more acceptable to the German's scientific taste in
form (for Locke and Hume, alone, were too illuminating, too clear--that
is to say, judged according to the German valuing instinct, "too
superficial").

Kant: a poor psychologist and mediocre judge of human nature, made
hopeless mistakes in regard to great historical values (the French
Revolution); a moral fanatic a la Rousseau; with a subterranean
current of Christian values; a thorough dogmatist, but bored to
extinction by this tendency, to the extent of wishing to tyrannise
over it, but quickly tired, even of 'scepticism; and not yet affected
by any cosmopolitan thought or antique beauty ... a dawdler and a
go-between, not at all original (like Leibnitz, something between
mechanism and spiritualism; like Goethe, something between the taste
of the eighteenth century and that of the "historical sense" [which
is essentially a sense of exoticism]; like German music, between
French and Italian music; like Charles the Great, who mediated and
built bridges between the Roman Empire and Nationalism--a dawdler par
excellence).

In what respect have the Christian centuries with their Pessimism
been stronger centuries than the eighteenth--and how do they
correspond with the tragic age of the Greeks?

The nineteenth century versus the eighteenth. How was it an
heir?--how was it a step backwards from the latter? (more lacking in
"spirit" and in taste)--how did it show an advance on the latter?
(more gloomy, more realistic, stronger).

How can we explain the fact that we feel something in common with the
Campagna romana? And the high mountain chain?

Chateaubriand in a letter to M. de Fontanes in 1803 writes his first
impression of the Campagna romana.

The President de Brosses says of the Campagna romana: "Il fallait
que Romulus fut ivre quand il songea a batir une ville dans un terrain
aussi laid."

Even Delacroix would have nothing to do with Rome, it frightened him.
He loved Venice, just as Shakespeare, Byron, and Georges Sand did.
Theophile Gautier's and Richard Wagner's dislike of Rome must not be
forgotten.

Lamartine has the language for Sorrento and Posilippo.

Victor Hugo raves about Spain, "parce que aucune autre nation n'a
moins emprunte a l'antiquite, parce qu'elle n'a subi aucune influence
classique."

The two great attempts that were made to overcome the eighteenth
century:

Napoleon, in that he called man, the soldier, and the great struggle
for power, to life again, and conceived Europe as a political power.

Goethe, in that he imagined a European culture which would consist
of the whole heritage of what humanity had attained to up to his time.

German culture in this century inspires mistrust--the music of the
period lacks that complete element which liberates and binds as well,
to wit--Goethe.

The pre-eminence of music in the romanticists of 1830 and 1840.
Delacroix. Ingres--a passionate musician (admired Gluck, Haydn,
Beethoven, Mozart), said to his pupils in Rome: "Si je pouvais vous
rendre tous musiciens, vous y gagneriez comme peintres"--likewise
Horace Vernet, who was particularly fond of Don Juan (as Mendelssohn
assures us, 1831); Stendhal, too, who says of himself: "Combien de
lieues ne ferais-je pas a pied, et a combien de jours de prison ne me
soumetterais-je pas pour entendre Don Juan ou le Matrimonio segreto;
et je ne sais pour quelle autre chose je ferais cet effort." He was
then fifty-six years old.

The borrowed forms, for instance: Brahms as a typical "Epigone,"
likewise Mendelssohn's cultured Protestantism (a former "soul" is
turned into poetry posthumously ...)

--the moral and poetical substitutions in Wagner, who used one art as
a stop-gap to make up for what another lacked.

--the "historical sense," inspiration derived from poems, sagas.

--that characteristic transformation of which G. Flaubert is the most
striking example among Frenchmen, and Richard Wagner the most striking
example among Germans, shows how the romantic belief in love and the
future changes into a longing for nonentity in 1830-50.

How is it that German music reaches its culminating point in the age of
German romanticism? How is it that German music lacks Goethe? On the
other hand, how much Schiller, or more exactly, how much "Thekla"[5] is
there not in Beethoven!

Schumann has Eichendorff, Uhland, Heine, Hoffman, Tieck, in him.
Richard Wagner has Freischutz, Hoffmann, Grimm, the romantic Saga,
the mystic Catholicism of instinct, symbolism, "the free-spiritedness
of passion" (Rousseau's intention). The Flying Dutchman savours of
France, where le tenebreux (1830) was the type of the seducer.

The cult of music, the revolutionary romanticism of form. Wagner
synthesises German and French romanticism.

[Footnote 5: Thekla is the sentimental heroine in Schiller's
Wallenstein.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.]

From the point of view only of his value to Germany and to German
culture, Richard Wagner is still a great problem, perhaps a German
misfortune: in any case, however, a fatality. But what does it
matter? Is he not very much more than a German event? It also
seems to me that to no country on earth is he less related than to
Germany; nothing was prepared there for his advent; his whole type
is simply strange amongst Germans; there he stands in their midst,
wonderful, misunderstood, incomprehensible. But people carefully avoid
acknowledging this: they are too kind, too square-headed--too German
for that. "Credo quia absurdus est": thus did the German spirit wish
it to be, in this case too--hence it is content meanwhile to believe
everything Richard Wagner wanted to have believed about himself. In all
ages the spirit of Germany has been deficient in subtlety and divining
powers concerning psychological matters. Now that it happens to be
under the high pressure of patriotic nonsense and self-adoration, it is
visibly growing thicker and coarser: how could it therefore be equal to
the problem of Wagner!

The Germans are not yet anything, but they are becoming something;
that is why they have not yet any culture;--that is why they cannot
yet have any culture!--They are not yet anything: that means they are
all kinds of things. They are becoming something: that means that
they will one day cease from being all kinds of things. The latter is
at bottom only a wish, scarcely a hope yet. Fortunately it is a wish
with which one can live, a question of will, of work, of discipline, a
question of training, as also of resentment, of longing, of privation,
of discomfort,--yea, even of bitterness,--in short, we Germans will
get something out of ourselves, something that has not yet been wanted
of us--we want something more!

That this "German, as he is not as yet"--has a right to something
better than the present German "culture"; that all who wish to
become something better, must wax angry when they perceive a sort of
contentment, an impudent "setting-oneself-at-ease," or "a process of
self-censing," in this quarter: that is my second principle, in regard
to which my opinions have not yet changed.

SIGNS OF INCREASING STRENGTH.

First Principle: everything that characterises modern men savours of
decay: but side by side with the prevailing sickness there are signs of
a strength and powerfulness of soul which are still untried. The same
causes which tend to promote the belittling of men, also force the
stronger and rarer individuals upwards to greatness.

General survey: the ambiguous character of our modern
world--precisely the same symptoms might at the same time be
indicative of either decline or strength. And the signs of strength
and of emancipation dearly bought, might in view of traditional
(or hereditary) appreciations concerned with the feelings, be
misunderstood as indications of weakness. In short, feeling, as a
means of fixing valuations, is not on a level with the times.

Generalised: Every valuation is always backward; it is merely the
expression of the conditions which favoured survival and growth in a
much earlier age: it struggles against new conditions of existence
out of which it did not arise, and which it therefore necessarily
misunderstands: it hinders, and excites suspicion against, all that is
new.

The problem of the nineteenth century.--To discover whether its
strong and weak side belong to each other. Whether they have been cut
from one and the same piece. Whether the variety of its ideals and
their contradictions are conditioned by a higher purpose: whether
they are something higher.--For it might be the prerequisite of
greatness, that growth should take place amid such violent tension.
Dissatisfaction, Nihilism, might be a good sign.

General survey.--As a matter of fact, all abundant growth involves a
concomitant process of crumbling to bits and decay: suffering and
the symptoms of decline belong to ages of enormous progress; every
fruitful and powerful movement of mankind has always brought about
a concurrent Nihilistic movement. Under certain circumstances, the
appearance of the extremest form of Pessimism and actual Nihilism
might be the sign of a process of incisive and most essential growth,
and of mankind's transit into completely new conditions of existence.
This is what I have understood.

Starting out with a thoroughly courageous appreciation of our men of
to-day:--we must not allow ourselves to be deceived by appearance: this
mankind is much less effective, but it gives quite different pledges
of lasting strength, its tempo is slower, but the rhythm itself is
richer. Healthiness is increasing, the real conditions of a healthy
body are on the point of being known, and will gradually be created,
"asceticism" is regarded with irony. The fear of extremes, a certain
confidence in the "right way," no raving: a periodical self-habituation
to narrower values (such as "mother-land," "science," etc.).

This whole picture, however, would still be ambiguous: it might be a
movement either of increase or decline in Life.

The belief in "progress"--in lower spheres of intelligence, appears as
increasing life: but this is self-deception;

in higher spheres of intelligence it is a sign of
declining life.

Description of the symptoms.

The unity of the aspect: uncertainty in regard to the standard of
valuation.

Fear of a general "in vain."

Nihilism.

As a matter of fact, we are no longer so urgently in need of an
antidote against the first Nihilism: Life is no longer so uncertain,
accidental, and senseless in modern Europe. All such tremendous
exaggeration of the value of men, of the value of evil, etc., are
not so necessary now; we can endure a considerable diminution of this
value, we may grant a great deal of nonsense and accident: the power
man has acquired now allows of a lowering of the means of discipline,
of which the strongest was the moral interpretation of the universe.
The hypothesis "God" is much too extreme.

If anything shows that our humanisation is a genuine sign of
progress, it is the fact that we no longer require excessive
contraries, that we no longer require contraries at all....

We may love the senses; for we have spiritualised them in every way and
made them artistic;

We have a right to all things which hitherto have been most
calumniated.

The reversal of the order of rank.--Those pious counterfeiters--the
priests--are becoming Chandala in our midst:--they occupy the
position of the charlatan, of the quack, of the counterfeiter, of the
sorcerer: we regard them as corrupters of the will, as the great
slanderers and vindictive enemies of Life, and as the rebels among
the bungled and the botched. We have made our middle class out of our
servant-caste--the Sudra--that is to say, our people or the body which
wields the political power.

On the other hand, the Chandala of former times is paramount: the
blasphemers, the immoralists, the independents of all kinds, the
artists, the Jews, the minstrels--and, at bottom, all disreputable
classes are in the van.

We have elevated ourselves to honourable thoughts,--even more, we
determine what honour is on earth,--"nobility." ... All of us to-day
are advocates of life.--We Immoralists are to-day the strongest
power: the other great powers are in need of us ... we re-create the
world in our own image.

We have transferred the label "Chandala" to the priests, the
backworldsmen, and to the deformed Christian society which has
become associated with these people, together with creatures of like
origin, the pessimists, Nihilists, romanticists of pity, criminals, and
men of vicious habits--the whole sphere in which the idea of "God" is
that of Saviour....

We are proud of being no longer obliged to be liars, slanderers, and
detractors of Life....

The advance of the nineteenth century upon the eighteenth (at bottom
we good Europeans are carrying on a war against the eighteenth
century):

"The return to Nature" is getting to be understood, ever more
definitely, in a way which is quite the reverse of that in which
Rousseau used the phrase--away from idylls and operas!

Ever more decided, more anti-idealistic, more objective, more
fearless, more industrious, more temperate, more suspicious of sudden
changes, anti-revolutionary;

The question of bodily health is being pressed ever more
decidedly in front of the health of "the soul": the latter is regarded
as a condition brought about by the former, and bodily health is
believed to be, at least, the prerequisite to spiritual health.

If anything at all has been achieved, it is a more innocent attitude
towards the senses, a happier, more favourable demeanour in regard
to sensuality, resembling rather the position taken up by Goethe; a
prouder feeling has also been developed in knowledge, and the "reine
Thor"[6] meets with little faith.

[Footnote 6: This is a reference to Wagner's Parsifal. The character
as is well known, is written to represent a son of heart's affliction,
and a child of wisdom--humble, guileless, loving, pure, and a
fool.--TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.]

We "objective people."--It is not "pity" that opens up the way for
us to all that is most remote and most strange in life and culture;
but our accessibility and ingenuousness, which precisely does not
"pity," but rather takes pleasure in hundreds of things which formerly
caused pain (which in former days either outraged or moved us, or in
the presence of which we were either hostile or indifferent). Pain in
all its various phases is now interesting to us: on that account we are
certainly not the more pitiful, even though the sight of pain may
shake us to our foundations and move us to tears: and we are absolutely
not inclined to be more helpful in view thereof.

In this deliberate desire to look on at all pain and error, we have
grown stronger and more powerful than in the eighteenth century; it
is a proof of our increase of strength (we have drawn closer to the
seventeenth and sixteenth centuries). But it is a profound mistake
to regard our "romanticism" as a proof of our "beautified souls." We
want stronger sensations than all coarser ages and classes have
wanted. (This fact must not be confounded with the needs of neurotics
and decadents; in their case, of course, there is a craving for pepper
--even for cruelty.)

We are all seeking conditions which are emancipated from the
bourgeois, and to a greater degree from the priestly, notion of
morality (every book which savours at all of priestdom and theology
gives us the impression of pitiful niaiserie and mental indigence).
"Good company," in fact, finds everything insipid which is not
forbidden and considered compromising in bourgeois circles; and the
case is the same with books, music, politics, and opinions on women.

The simplification of man in the nineteenth century (The eighteenth
century was that of elegance, subtlety, and generous feeling).--Not
"return to nature"; for no natural humanity has ever existed yet.
Scholastic, unnatural, and antinatural values are the rule and the
beginning; man only reaches Nature after a long struggle--he never
turns his "back" to her.... To be natural means, to dare to be as
immoral as Nature is.

We are coarser, more direct, richer in irony towards generous feelings,
even when we are beneath them.

Our haute volee, the society consisting of our rich and leisured
men, is more natural: people hunt each other, the love of the sexes
is a kind of sport in which marriage is both a charm and an obstacle;
people entertain each other and live for the sake of pleasure; bodily
advantages stand in the first rank, and curiosity and daring are the
rule.

Our attitude towards knowledge is more natural; we are innocent
in our absolute spiritual debauchery, we hate pathetic and hieratic
manners, we delight in that which is most strictly prohibited, we
should scarcely recognise any interest in knowledge if we were bored in
acquiring it.

Our attitude to morality is also more natural. Principles have become
a laughing-stock; no one dares to speak of his "duty," unless in irony.
But a helpful, benevolent disposition is highly valued. (Morality is
located in instinct and the rest is despised. Besides this there are
few points of honour.)

Our attitude to politics is more natural: we see problems of power,
of the quantum of power, against another quantum. We do not believe in
a right that does not proceed from a power which is able to uphold it.
We regard all rights as conquests.

Our valuation of great men and things is more natural: we regard
passion as a privilege; we can conceive of nothing great which does not
involve a great crime; all greatness is associated in our minds with a
certain standing-beyond-the-pale in morality.

Our attitude to Nature is more natural: we no longer love her for her
"innocence," her "reason," her "beauty," we have made her beautifully
devilish and "foolish." But instead of despising her on that account,
since then we have felt more closely related to her and more familiar
in her presence. She does not aspire to virtue: we therefore respect
her.

Our attitude towards Art is more natural: we do not exact beautiful,
empty lies, etc., from her; brutal positivism reigns supreme, and it
ascertains things with perfect calm.

In short: there are signs showing that the European of the nineteenth
century is less ashamed of his instincts; he has gone a long way
towards acknowledging his unconditional naturalness and immorality,
without bitterness: on the contrary, he is strong enough to endure
this point of view alone.

To some ears this will sound as though corruption had made strides:
and certain it is that man has not drawn nearer to the "Nature"
which Rousseau speaks about, but has gone one step farther in the
civilisation before which Rousseau stood in horror. We have grown
stronger, we have drawn nearer to the seventeenth century, more
particularly to the taste which reigned towards its close (Dancourt, Le
Sage, Renard).

Culture versus Civilisation.--The culminating stages of culture
and civilisation lie apart: one must not be led astray as regards the
fundamental antagonism existing between culture and civilisation.
From the moral standpoint, great periods in the history of culture
have always been periods of corruption; while on the other hand,
those periods in which man was deliberately and compulsorily tamed
("civilisation") have always been periods of intolerance towards the
most intellectual and most audacious natures. Civilisation desires
something different from what culture strives after: their aims may
perhaps be opposed....

What I warn people against: confounding the instincts of decadence
with those of humanity;

Confounding the dissolving means of civilisation and those which
necessarily promote decadence, with culture;

Confounding debauchery, and the principle, "laisser aller," with the
Will to Power (the latter is the exact reverse of the former).

The unsolved problems which I set anew: the problem of civilisation,
the struggle between Rousseau and Voltaire about the year 1760. Man
becomes deeper, more mistrustful, more "immoral," stronger, more
self-confident--and therefore "more natural"; that is "progress."
In this way, by a process of division of labour, the more evil strata
and the milder and tamer strata of society get separated: so that the
general facts are not visible at first sight.... It is a sign of
strength, and of the self-control and fascination of the strong, that
these stronger strata possess the arts in order to make their greater
powers for evil felt as something "higher" As soon as there is
"progress" there is a transvaluation of the strengthened factors into
the "good."

Man must have the courage of his natural instincts restored to him.--

The poor opinion he has of himself must be destroyed (not in the
sense of the individual, but in the sense of the natural man ...)--

The contradictions in things must be eradicated, after it has been
well understood that we were responsible for them--

Social idiosyncrasies must be stamped out of existence (guilt,
punishment, justice, honesty, freedom, love, etc. etc.)--

An advance towards "naturalness": in all political questions, even
in the relations between parties, even in merchants', workmen's, or
contractors' parties, only questions of power come into play:--
"what one can do" is the first question, what one ought to do is only
a secondary consideration.

Socialism--or the tyranny of the meanest and the most
brainless,--that is to say, the superficial, the envious, and the
mummers, brought to its zenith,--is, as a matter, of fact, the logical
conclusion of "modern ideas" and their latent anarchy: but in the
genial atmosphere of democratic well-being the capacity for forming
resolutions or even for coming to an end at all, is paralysed. Men
follow--but no longer their reason. That is why socialism is on the
whole a hopelessly bitter affair: and there is nothing more amusing
than to observe the discord between the poisonous and desperate faces
of present-day socialists--and what wretched and nonsensical feelings
does not their style reveal to us!--and the childish lamblike happiness
of their hopes and desires. Nevertheless, in many places in Europe,
there may be violent hand-to-hand struggles and irruptions on their
account: the coming century is likely to be convulsed in more than
one spot, and the Paris Commune, which finds defenders and advocates
even in Germany, will seem to have been but a slight indigestion
compared with what is to come. Be this as it may, there will always
be too many people of property for socialism ever to signify anything
more than an attack of illness: and these people of property are like
one man with one faith, "one must possess something in order to
be some one." This, however, is the oldest and most wholesome of
all instincts; I should add: "one must desire more than one has in
order to become more." For this is the teaching which life itself
preaches to all living things: the morality of Development. To have
and to wish to have more, in a word, Growth--that is life itself.
In the teaching of socialism "a will to the denial of life" is but
poorly concealed: botched men and races they must be who have devised
a teaching of this sort. In fact, I even wish a few experiments might
be made to show that in a socialistic society, life denies itself,
and itself cuts away its own roots. The earth is big enough and man
is still unexhausted enough for a practical lesson of this sort and
demonstratio ad absurdum--even if it were accomplished only by a vast
expenditure of lives--to seem worth while to me. Still, Socialism,
like a restless mole beneath the foundations of a society wallowing in
stupidity, will be able to achieve something useful and salutary: it
delays "Peace on Earth" and the whole process of character-softening of
the democratic herding animal; it forces the European to have an extra
supply of intellect,--that is to say, craft and caution, and prevents
his entirely abandoning the manly and warlike qualities,--it also saves
Europe awhile from the marasmus femininus which is threatening it.

The most favourable obstacles and remedies of modernity:

Compulsory military service with real wars in which all joking is
laid aside.

National thick-headedness (which simplifies and concentrates).

Improved nutrition (meat).

Increasing cleanliness and wholesomeness in the home.

The predominance of physiology over theology, morality,
economics, and politics.

Military discipline in the exaction and the practice of one's
"duty" (it is no longer customary to praise).

I am delighted at the military development of Europe, also at the inner
anarchical conditions: the period of quietude and "Chinadom" which
Galiani prophesied for this century is now over. Personal and manly
capacity, bodily capacity recovers its value, valuations are becoming
more physical, nutrition consists ever more and more of flesh. Fine
men have once more become possible. Bloodless sneaks (with mandarins
at their head, as Comte imagined them) are now a matter of the past.
The savage in every one of us is acknowledged, even the wild animal.
Precisely on that account, philosophers will have a better chance.
--Kant is a scarecrow!

I have not yet seen any reasons to feel discouraged. He who acquires
and preserves a strong will, together with a broad mind, has a more
favourable chance now than ever he had. For the plasticity of man has
become exceedingly great in democratic Europe: men who learn easily,
who readily adapt themselves, are the rule: the gregarious animal of
a high order of intelligence is prepared. He who would command finds
those who must obey: I have Napoleon and Bismarck in mind, for
instance. The struggle against strong and unintelligent wills, which
forms the surest obstacle in one's way, is really insignificant Who
would not be able to knock down these "objective" gentlemen with weak
wills, such as Ranke and Renan!

Spiritual enlightenment is an unfailing means of making men
uncertain, weak of will, and needful of succour and support; in
short, of developing the herding instincts in them. That is why all
great artist-rulers, hitherto (Confucius in China, the Roman Empire,
Napoleon, Popedom--at a time when they had the courage of their
worldliness and frankly pursued power) in whom the ruling instincts,
that had prevailed until their time, culminated, also made use of the
spiritual enlightenment--or at least allowed it to be supreme (after
the style of the Popes of the Renaissance). The self-deception of
the masses on this point, in every democracy for instance, is of the
greatest possible value: all that makes men smaller and more amenable
is pursued under the title "progress."

The highest equity and mildness as a condition of weakness (the New
Testament and the early Christian community--manifesting itself in the
form of utter foolishness in the Englishmen, Darwin and Wallace). Your
equity, ye higher men, drives you to universal suffrage, etc.; your
"humanity" urges you to be milder towards crime and stupidity. In the
end you will thus help stupidity and harmlessness to conquer.

Outwardly: Ages of terrible wars, insurrections, explosions.
Inwardly: ever more and more weakness among men; events take the
form of excitants. The Parisian as the type of the European extreme.

Consequences: (1) Savages (at first, of course, in conformity with
the culture that has reigned hitherto); (2) Sovereign individuals
(where powerful barbarous masses and emancipation from all that
has been, are crossed). The age of greatest stupidity, brutality, and
wretchedness in the masses, and in the highest individuals.

An incalculable number of higher individuals now perish: but he who
escapes their fate is as strong as the devil. In this respect we are
reminded of the conditions which prevailed in the Renaissance.

How are Good Europeans such as ourselves distinguished from the
patriots? In the first place, we are atheists and immoralists, but we
take care to support the religions and the morality which we associate
with the gregarious instinct: for by means of them, an order of men is,
so to speak, being prepared, which must at some time or other fall into
our hands, which must actually crave for our hands.

Beyond Good and Evil,--certainly; but we insist upon the unconditional
and strict preservation of herd-morality.

We reserve ourselves the right to several kinds of philosophy which it
is necessary to learn: under certain circumstances, the pessimistic
kind as a hammer; a European Buddhism might perhaps be indispensable.

We should probably support the development and the maturation of
democratic tendencies; for it conduces to weakness of will: in
"Socialism" we recognise a thorn which prevents smug ease.

Attitude towards the people.. Our prejudices; we pay attention to the
results of cross-breeding.

Detached, well-to-do, strong: irony concerning the "press" and its
culture. Our care: that scientific men should not become journalists.
We mistrust any form of culture that tolerates news-paper reading or
writing.

We make our accidental positions (as Goethe and Stendhal did), our
experiences, a foreground, and we lay stress upon them, so that we
may deceive concerning our backgrounds. We ourselves wait and
avoid putting our heart into them. They serve us as refuges, such as
a wanderer might require and use--but we avoid feeling at home in
them. We are ahead of our fellows in that we have had a disciplina
voluntatis. All strength is directed to the development of the will,
an art which allows us to wear masks, an art of understanding beyond
the passions (also "super-European" thought at times).

This is our preparation before becoming the law-givers of the future
and the lords of the earth; if not we, at least our children. Caution
where marriage is concerned.

The twentieth century.--The Abbe Galiani says somewhere: "La
prevoyance est la cause des guerres actuelles de l'Europe. Si l'on
voulait se donner la peine de ne rien prevoir, tout le monde serait
tranquille, et je ne crois pas qu'on serait plus malheureux parce qu'on
ne ferait pas la guerre." As I in no way share the unwarlike views of
my deceased friend Galiani, I have no fear whatever of saying something
beforehand with the view of conjuring in some way the cause of wars.

A condition of excessive consciousness, after the worst of
earthquakes: with new questions.

It is the time of the great noon, of the most appalling
enlightenment: my particular kind of Pessimism: the great
starting-point.

Fundamental contradiction between civilisation and the elevation of
man.

Moral valuations regarded as a history of lies and the art of
calumny in the service of the Will to Power (of the will of the herd,
which rises against stronger men).

The conditions which determine every elevation in culture (the
facilitation of a selection being made at the cost of a crowd) are
the conditions of all growth.

The multiformity of the world as a question of strength,
which sees all things in the perspective of their growth. The moral
Christian values to be regarded as the insurrection and mendacity of
slaves (in comparison with the aristocratic values of the ancient
world). 

SECOND BOOK.

CRITICISM OF THE HIGHEST VALUES THAT HAVE PREVAILED HITHERTO.

CRITICISM OF RELIGION.

All the beauty and sublimity with which we have invested real and
imagined things, I will show to be the property and product of man, and
this should be his most beautiful apology. Man as a poet, as a thinker,
as a god, as love, as power. Oh, the regal liberality with which he
has lavished gifts upon things in order to impoverish himself and
make himself feel wretched! Hitherto, this has been his greatest
disinterestedness, that he admired and worshipped, and knew how to
conceal from himself that he it was who had created what he admired.

CONCERNING THE ORIGIN OF RELIGIONS.

The origin of religion.--Just as the illiterate man of to-day
believes that his wrath is the cause of his being angry, that his
mind is the cause of his thinking, that his soul is the cause of
his feeling, in short, just as a mass of psychological entities
are still unthinkingly postulated as causes; so, in a still more
primitive age, the same phenomena were interpreted by man by means of
personal entities. Those conditions of his soul which seemed strange,
overwhelming, and rapturous, he regarded as obsessions and bewitching
influences emanating from the power of some personality. (Thus the
Christian, the most puerile and backward man of this age, traces hope,
peace, and the feeling of deliverance to a psychological inspiration
on the part of God: being by nature a sufferer and a creature in need
of repose, states of happiness, peace, and resignation, perforce seem
strange to him, and seem to need some explanation.) Among intelligent,
strong, and vigorous races, the epileptic is mostly the cause of a
belief in the existence of some foreign power; but all such examples
of apparent subjection--as, for instance, the bearing of the exalted
man, of the poet, of the great criminal, or the passions, love and
revenge--lead to the invention of supernatural powers. A condition is
made concrete by being identified with a personality, and when this
condition overtakes anybody, it is ascribed to that personality. In
other words: in the psychological concept of God, a certain state of
the soul is personified as a cause in order to appear as an effect.

The psychological logic is as follows: when the feeling of power
suddenly seizes and overwhelms a man,--and this takes place in the
case of all the great passions,--a doubt arises in him concerning his
own person: he dare not think himself the cause of this astonishing
sensation--and thus he posits a stronger person, a Godhead as its
cause. In short, the origin of religion lies in the extreme feelings
of power, which, being strange, take men by surprise: and just
as the sick man, who feels one of his limbs unaccountably heavy,
concludes that another man must be sitting on it, so the ingenuous
homo religiosus, divides himself up into several people. Religion
is an example of the "alteration de la personalite." A sort of fear
and sensation of terror in one's own presence.... But also a feeling
of inordinate rapture and exaltation. Among sick people, the
sensation of health suffices to awaken a belief in the proximity of
God.

Rudimentary psychology of the religious man:--All changes are
effects; all effects are effects of will (the notion of "Nature"
and of "natural law," is lacking); all effects presuppose an agent.
Rudimentary psychology: one is only a cause oneself, when one knows
that one has willed something.

Result: States of power impute to man the feeling that he is not the
cause of them, that he is not responsible for them: they come without
being willed to do so--consequently we cannot be their originators:
will that is not free (that is to say, the knowledge of a change in our
condition which we have not helped to bring about) requires a strong
will.

Consequence of this rudimentary psychology: Man has never dared to
credit himself with his strong and startling moods, he has always
conceived them as "passive," as "imposed upon him from outside":
Religion is the offshoot of a doubt concerning the entity of the
person, an alteration of the personality: in so far as everything
great and strong in man was considered superhuman and foreign, man
belittled himself,--he laid the two sides, the very pitiable and weak
side, and the very strong and startling side apart, in two spheres, and
called the one "Man" and the other "God."

And he has continued to act on these lines; during the period of the
moral idiosyncrasy he did not interpret his lofty and sublime moral
states as "proceeding from his own will" or as the "work" of the
person. Even the Christian himself divides his personality into two
parts, the one a mean and weak fiction which he calls man, and the
other which he calls God (Deliverer and Saviour).

Religion has lowered the concept "man"; its ultimate conclusion is
that all goodness, greatness, and truth are superhuman, and are only
obtainable by the grace of God.

One way of raising man out of his self-abasement, which brought about
the decline of the point of view that classed all lofty and strong
states of the soul, as strange, was the theory of relationship. These
lofty and strong states of the soul could at least be interpreted as
the influence of our forebears; we belonged to each other, we were
irrevocably joined; we grew in our own esteem, by acting according to
the example of a model known to us all.

There is an attempt on the part of noble families to associate religion
with their own feelings of self-respect. Poets and seers do the same
thing; they feel proud that they have been worthy,--that they have been
selected for such association,--they esteem it an honour, not to be
considered at all as individuals, but as mere mouthpieces (Homer).

Man gradually takes possession of the highest and proudest states of
his soul, as also of his acts and his works. Formerly it was believed
that one paid oneself the greatest honour by denying one's own
responsibility for the highest deeds one accomplished, and by ascribing
them to--God. The will which was not free, appeared to be that which
imparted a higher value to a deed: in those days a god was postulated
as the author of the deed.

Priests are the actors of something which is supernatural, either in
the way of ideals, gods, or saviours, and they have to make people
believe in them; in this they find their calling, this is the purpose
of their instincts; in order to make it as credible as possible, they
have to exert themselves to the utmost extent in the art of posing;
their actor's sagacity must, above all, aim at giving them a clean
conscience, by means of which, alone, it is possible to persuade
effectively.

The priest wishes to make it an understood thing, that he is the
highest type of man, that he rules,--even over those who wield the
power,--that he is indispensable and unassailable,--that he is the
strongest power in the community, not by any means to be replaced or
undervalued.

Means thereto: he alone is cultured; he alone is the man of virtue;
he alone has sovereign power over himself: he alone is, in a certain
sense, God, and ultimately goes back to the Godhead; he alone is the
middleman between God and others; the Godhead administers punishment
to every one who puts the priest at a disadvantage, or who thinks in
opposition to him.

Means thereto: Truth exists. There is only one way of attaining to
it, and that is to become a priest. Everything good, which relates
either to order, nature, or tradition, is to be traced to the wisdom
of the priests. The Holy Book is their work. The whole of nature is
only a fulfilment of the maxims which it contains. No other source of
goodness exists than the priests. Every other kind of perfection, even
the warrior's, is different in rank from that of the priests.

Consequence: If the priest is to be the highest type, then the
degrees which lead to his virtues must be the degrees of value
among men. Study, emancipation from material things, inactivity,
impassibility, absence of passion, solemnity;--the opposite of all
this is found in the lowest type of man.

The priest has taught a kind of morality which conduced to his being
considered the highest type of man. He conceives a type which
is the reverse of his own: the Chandala. By making these as
contemptible as possible, some strength is lent to the order of
castes. The priest's excessive fear of sensuality also implies that
the latter is the most serious threat to the order of castes (that is
to say, order in general).... Every "free tendency" in puncto puncti
overthrows the laws of marriage.

The philosopher considered as the development of the priestly
type:--He has the heritage of the priest in his blood; even as a rival
he is compelled to fight with the same weapons as the priest of his
time;--he aspires to the highest authority.

What is it that bestows authority upon men who have no physical power
to wield (no army, no arms at all ...)? How do such men gain authority
over those who are in possession of material power, and who represent
authority? (Philosophers enter the lists against princes, victorious
conquerors, and wise statesmen.)

They can do it only by establishing the belief that they are in
possession of a power which is higher and stronger--God. Nothing is
strong enough: every one is in need of the mediation and the services
of priests. They establish themselves as indispensable intercessors.
The conditions of their existence are: (1) That people believe in the
absolute superiority of their god, in fact believe in their god';
that there is no other access, no direct access to god, save
through them. The second condition alone gives rise to the concept
"heterodoxy"; the first to the concept "disbelievers" (that is to
say, he who believes in another god).

A Criticism of the Holy Lie.--That a lie is allowed in pursuit
of holy ends 'is a principle which belongs to the theory of all
priestcraft, and the object of this inquiry is to discover to what
extent it belongs to its practice.

But philosophers, too, whenever they intend taking over the leadership
of mankind, with the ulterior motives of priests in their minds, have
never failed to arrogate to themselves the right to lie: Plato above
all. But the most elaborate of lies is the double lie, developed
by the typically Arian philosophers of the Vedanta: two systems,
contradicting each other in all their main points, but interchangeable,
complementary, and mutually expletory, when educational ends were in
question. The lie of the one has to create a condition in which the
truth of the other can alone become intelligible....

How far does the holy lie of priests and philosophers go?--The
question here is, what hypotheses do they advance in regard to
education, and what are the dogmas they are compelled to invent in
order to do justice to these hypotheses?

First: they must have power, authority, and absolute credibility on
their side.

Secondly: they must have the direction of the whole of Nature, so that
everything affecting the individual seems to be determined by their law.

Thirdly: their domain of power must be very extensive, in order that
its control may escape the notice of those they subject: they must know
the penal code of the life beyond--of the life "after death,"--and, of
course, the means whereby the road to blessedness may be discovered.
They have to put the notion of a natural course of things out of sight,
but as they are intelligent and thoughtful people, they are able to
promise a host of effects, which they naturally say are conditioned
by prayer or by the strict observance of their law. They can, moreover,
prescribe a large number of things which are exceedingly reasonable
--only they must not point to experience or empiricism as the source
of this wisdom, but to revelation or to the fruits of the "most severe
exercises of penance."

The holy lie, therefore, applies principally to the purpose of
an action (the natural purpose, reason, is made to vanish: a moral
purpose, the observance of some law, a service to God, seems to be the
purpose): to the consequence of an action (the natural consequence
is interpreted as something supernatural, and, in order to be on
surer ground, other incontrollable and supernatural consequences are
foretold).

In this way the concepts good and evil are created, and seem
quite divorced from the natural concepts: "useful," "harmful,"
"life-promoting," "life-retarding,"--indeed, inasmuch as another
life is imagined, the former concepts may even be antagonistic to
Nature's concepts of good and evil. In this way, the proverbial concept
"conscience" is created: an inner voice, which, though it makes itself
heard in regard to every action, does not measure the worth of that
action according to its results, but according to its conformity or
non-conformity to the "law."

The holy lie therefore invented: (1) a god who punishes and
rewards, who recognises and carefully observes the law-book of the
priests, and who is particular about sending them into the world as
his mouthpieces and plenipotentiaries; (2) an After Life, in which,
alone, the great penal machine is supposed to be active--to this end
the immortality of the soul was invented; (3) a conscience in
man, understood as the knowledge that good and evil are permanent
values--that God himself speaks through it, whenever its counsels are
in conformity with priestly precepts; (4) Morality as the denial of
all natural processes, as the subjection of all phenomena to a moral
order, as the interpretation of all phenomena as the effects of a moral
order of things (that is to say, the concept of punishment and reward),
as the only power and only creator of all transformations; (5) Truths
given, revealed, and identical with the teaching of the priests: as the
condition to all salvation and happiness in this and the next world.

In short: what is the price paid for the improvement supposed
to be due to morality?--The unhinging of reason, the reduction of
all motives to fear and hope (punishment and reward); dependence
upon the tutelage of priests, and upon a formulary exactitude
which is supposed to express a divine will; the implantation of
a "conscience" which establishes a false science in the place of
experience and experiment: as though all one had to do or had not
to do were predetermined--a kind of contraction of the seeking and
striving spirit;--in short: the worst mutilation of man that can be
imagined, and it is pretended that "the good man" is the result.

Practically speaking, all reason, the whole heritage of intelligence,
subtlety, and caution, the first condition of the priestly canon, is
arbitrarily reduced, when it is too late, to a simple mechanical
process: conformity with the law becomes a purpose in itself, it is the
highest purpose; Life no longer contains any problems;--the whole
conception of the world is polluted by the notion of punishment;
--Life itself, owing to the fact that the priests life is upheld as
the non plus ultra of perfection, is transformed into a denial and
pollution of life;--the concept "God" represents an aversion to Life,
and even a criticism and a contemning of it. Truth is transformed in
the mind, into priestly prevarication; the striving after truth, into
the study of the Scriptures, into the way to become a theologian.

A criticism of the Law-Book of Manu.--The whole book is founded upon
the holy lie. Was it the well-being of humanity that inspired the whole
of this system? Was this kind of man, who believes in the interested
nature of every action, interested or not interested in the success
of this system? The desire to improve mankind--whence comes the
inspiration to this feeling? Whence is the concept improvement taken?

We find a class of men, the sacerdotal class, who consider themselves
the standard pattern, the highest example and most perfect expression
of the type man. The notion of "improving" mankind, to this class of
men, means to make mankind like themselves. They believe in their own
superiority, they will be superior in practice: the cause of the holy
lie is The Will to Power....

Establishment of the dominion: to this end, ideas which place a non
plus ultra of power with the priesthood are made to prevail. Power
acquired by lying was the result of the recognition of the fact that it
was not already possessed physically, in a military form.... Lying as a
supplement to power--this is a new concept of "truth."

It is a mistake to presuppose unconscious and innocent development
in this quarter--a sort of self-deception. Fanatics are not the
discoverers of such exhaustive systems of oppression.... Cold-blooded
reflection must have been at work here; the same sort of reflection
which Plato showed when he worked out his "State"--"One must desire the
means when one desires the end." Concerning this political maxim, all
legislators have always been quite clear.

We possess the classical model, and it is specifically Arian: we
can therefore hold the most gifted and most reflective type of man
responsible for the most systematic lie that has ever been told....
Everywhere almost the lie was copied, and thus Avian influence
corrupted the world....

Much is said to-day about the Semitic spirit of the New Testament:
but the thing referred to is merely priestcraft,--and in the purest
example of an Arian law-book, in Manu, this kind of "Semitic
spirit"--that is to say, Sacerdotalism, is worse than anywhere else.

The development of the Jewish hierarchy is not original: they learnt
the scheme in Babylon--it is Arian. When, later on, the same thing
became dominant in Europe, under the preponderance of Germanic blood,
this was in conformity to the spirit of the ruling race: a striking
case of atavism. The Germanic middle ages aimed at a revival of the
Arian order of castes.

Mohammedanism in its turn learned from Christianity the use of a
"Beyond" as an instrument of punishment.

The scheme of a permanent community, with priests at its
head--this oldest product of Asia's great culture in the domain of
organisation--naturally provoked reflection and imitation in every
way.--Plato is an example of this, but above all, the Egyptians.

Moralities and religions are the principal means by which one can
modify men into whatever one likes; provided one is possessed of an
overflow of creative power, and can cause one's will to prevail over
long periods of time.

If one wish to see an affirmative Arian religion which is the product
of a ruling class, one should read the law-book of Manu. (The
deification of the feeling of power in the Brahmin: it is interesting
to note that it originated in the warrior-caste, and was later
transferred to the priests.)

If one wish to see an affirmative religion of the Semitic order,
which is the product of the ruling class, one should read the Koran
or the earlier portions of the Old Testament. (Mohammedanism, as a
religion for men, has profound contempt for the sentimentality and
prevarication of Christianity, ... which, according to Mohammedans, is
a woman's religion.)

If one wish to see a negative religion of the Semitic order, which is
the product of the oppressed class, one should read the New Testament
(which, according to Indian and Arian points of view, is a religion for
the Chandala).

If one wish to see a negative Arian religion, which is the product of
the ruling classes, one should study Buddhism.

It is quite in the nature of things that we have no Arian religion
which is the product of the oppressed classes; for that would have
been a contradiction: a race of masters is either paramount or else it
goes to the dogs.

Religion, per se, has nothing to do with morality; yet both offshoots
of the Jewish religion are essentially moral religions--which
prescribe the rules of living, and procure obedience to their
principles by means of rewards and punishment.

Paganism--Christianity.--Paganism is that which says yea to all
that is natural, it is innocence in being natural, "naturalness."
Christianity is that which says no to all that is natural, it is a
certain lack of dignity in being natural; hostility to Nature.

"Innocent":--Petronius is innocent, for instance. Beside this happy
man a Christian is absolutely devoid of innocence. But since even
the Christian status is ultimately only a natural condition, the
term "Christian" soon begins to mean the counterfeiting of the
psychological interpretation.

The Christian priest is from the root a mortal enemy of sensuality: one
cannot imagine a greater contrast to his attitude than the guileless,
slightly awed, and solemn attitude, which the religious rites of the
most honourable women in Athens maintained in the presence of the
symbol of sex. In all non-ascetic religions the procreative act is
the secret per se: a sort of symbol of perfection and of the
designs of the future: re-birth, immortality.

Our belief in ourselves is the greatest fetter, the most telling spur,
and the strongest pinion. Christianity ought to have elevated the
innocence of man to the position of an article of belief--men would
then have become gods: in those days believing was still possible.

The egregious lie of history: as if it were the corruption of
Paganism that opened the road to Christianity. As a matter of fact, it
was the enfeeblement and moralisation of the man of antiquity. The
new interpretation of natural functions, which made them appear like
vices, had already gone before!

Religions are ultimately wrecked by the belief in morality. The idea of
the Christian moral God becomes untenable,--hence "Atheism,"--as though
there could be no other god.

Culture is likewise wrecked by the belief in morality. For when the
necessary and only possible conditions of its growth are revealed,
nobody will any longer countenance it (Buddhism).

The physiology of Nihilistic religions.--All in all, the Nihilistic
religions are systematised histories of sickness described in
religious and moral terminology.

In pagan cultures it is around the interpretation of the great annual
cycles that the religious cult turns; in Christianity it is around a
cycle of paralytic phenomena.

This Nihilistic religion gathers together all the decadent elements
and things of like order which it can find in antiquity, viz.:--

The weak and the botched (the refuse of the ancient world,
and that of which it rid itself with most violence).

Those who are morally obsessed and anti-pagan.

Those who are weary of politics and indifferent (the blase
Romans), the denationalised, who know not what they are.

Those who are tired of themselves--who are happy to be party to a
subterranean conspiracy.

Buddha versus Christ.--Among the Nihilistic religions, Christianity
and Buddhism may always be sharply distinguished. Buddhism is the
expression of a fine evening, perfectly sweet and mild--it is a sort
of gratitude towards all that lies hidden, including that which it
entirely lacks, viz., bitterness, disillusionment, and resentment.
Finally it possesses lofty intellectual love; it has got over all
the subtlety of philosophical contradictions, and is even resting
after it, though it is precisely from that source that it derives its
intellectual glory and its glow as of a sunset (it originated in the
higher classes).

Christianity is a degenerative movement, consisting of all kinds
of decaying and excremental elements: it is not the expression of
the downfall of a race, it is, from the root, an agglomeration of all
the morbid elements which are mutually attractive and which gravitate
to one another.... It is therefore not a national religion, not
determined by race: it appeals to the disinherited everywhere; it
consists of a foundation of resentment against all that is successful
and dominant: it is in need of a symbol which represents the damnation
of everything successful and dominant. It is opposed to every form of
intellectual movement, to all philosophy: it takes up the cudgels for
idiots, and utters a curse upon all intellect. Resentment against those
who are gifted, learned, intellectually independent: in all these it
suspects the element of success and domination.

In Buddhism this thought prevails: "All passions, everything which
creates emotions and leads to blood, is a call to action"--to this
extent alone are its believers warned against evil. For action has
no sense, it merely binds one to existence. All existence, however, has
no sense. Evil is interpreted as that which leads to irrationalism:
to the affirmation of means whose end is denied. A road to nonentity
is the desideratum, hence all emotional impulses are regarded with
horror. For instance: "On no account seek after revenge! Be the enemy
of no one!"--The Hedonism of the weary finds its highest expression
here. Nothing is more utterly foreign to Buddhism than the Jewish
fanaticism of St. Paul: nothing could be more contrary to its instinct
than the tension, fire, and unrest of the religious man, and, above
all, that form of sensuality which sanctifies Christianity with the
name "Love." Moreover, it is the cultured and very intellectual classes
who find blessedness in Buddhism: a race wearied and besotted by
centuries of philosophical quarrels, but not beneath all culture as
those classes were from which Christianity sprang.... In the Buddhistic
ideal, there is essentially an emancipation from good and evil: a
very subtle suggestion of a Beyond to all morality is thought out
in its teaching, and this Beyond is supposed to be compatible with
perfection,--the condition being, that even good actions are only
needed pro tem., merely as a means,--that is to say, in order to be
free from all action.

How very curious it is to see a Nihilistic religion such as
Christianity, sprung from, and in keeping with, a decrepit and worn-out
people, who have outlived all strong instincts, being transferred step
by step to another environment--that is to say, to a land of young
people, who have not yet lived at all. The joy of the final chapter,
of the fold and of the evening, preached to barbarians and Germans!
How thoroughly all of it must first have been barbarised, Germanised!
To those who had dreamed of a Walhalla: who found happiness only in
war!--A supernational religion preached in the midst of chaos, where
no nations yet existed even.

The only way to refute priests and religions is this: to show that
their errors are no longer beneficent--that they are rather harmful;
in short, that their own "proof of power" no longer holds good....

CONCERNING THE HISTORY OF CHRISTIANITY.

Christianity as an historical reality should not be confounded with
that one root which its name recalls. The other roots, from which it
has sprung, are by far the more important. It is an unprecedented abuse
of names to identify such manifestations of decay and such abortions as
the "Christian Church," "Christian belief," and "Christian life," with
that Holy Name. What did Christ deny?--Everything which to-day is
called Christian.

The whole of the Christian creed--all Christian "truth," is idle
falsehood and deception, and is precisely the reverse of that which was
at the bottom of the first Christian movement.

All that which in the ecclesiastical sense is Christian, is just
exactly what is most radically anti-Christian: crowds of things and
people appear instead of symbols, history takes the place of eternal
facts, it is all forms, rites, and dogmas instead of a "practice" of
life. To be really Christian would mean to be absolutely indifferent to
dogmas, cults, priests, church, and theology.

The practice of Christianity is no more an impossible phantasy than the
practice of Buddhism is: it is merely a means to happiness.

Jesus goes straight to the point, the "Kingdom of Heaven" in the heart,
and He does not find the means in duty to the Jewish Church; He
even regards the reality of Judaism (its need to maintain itself) as
nothing; He is concerned purely with the inner man.

Neither does He make anything of all the coarse forms relating to man's
intercourse with God: He is opposed to the whole of the teaching of
repentance and atonement; He points out how man ought to live in order
to feel himself "deified," and how futile it is on his part to hope to
live properly by showing repentance and contrition for his sins. "Sin
is of no account" is practically his chief standpoint.

Sin, repentance, forgiveness,--all this does not belong to Christianity
... it is Judaism or Paganism which has become mixed up with Christ's
teaching.

The Kingdom of Heaven is a state of the heart (of children it is
written, "for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven"): it has nothing to
do with superterrestrial things. The Kingdom of God "cometh," not
chronologically or historically, not on a certain day in the calendar;
it is not something which one day appears and was not previously there;
it is a "change of feeling in the individual," it is something which
may come at any time and which may be absent at any time....

The thief on the cross;--When the criminal himself, who endures a
painful death, declares: "the way this Jesus suffers and dies, without
a murmur of revolt or enmity, graciously and resignedly, is the only
right way," he assents to the gospel; and by this very fact he is in
Paradise....

Jesus bids us:--not to resist, either by deeds or in our heart, him who
ill-treats us;

He bids us admit of no grounds for separating ourselves from our wives;

He bids us make no distinction between foreigners and
fellow-countrymen, strangers and familiars;

He bids us show anger to no one, and treat no one with contempt;--give
alms secretly; not to desire to become rich;--not to swear;--not to
stand in judgment;--become reconciled with our enemies and forgive
offences;--not to worship in public.

"Blessedness" is nothing promised: it is here, with us, if we only wish
to live and act in a particular way.

Subsequent Additions;--The whole of the prophet- and
thaumaturgist-attitudes and the bad temper; while the conjuring-up of a
supreme tribunal of justice is an abominable corruption (see Mark vi.
11: "And whosoever shall not receive you.... Verily I say unto you, It
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha," etc.). The "fig tree"
(Matt. xxi. 18, 19): "Now in the morning as he returned into the city,
he hungered. And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and
found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit
grow on thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered
away."

The teaching of rewards and punishments has become mixed up with
Christianity in a way which is quite absurd; everything is thereby
spoilt. In the same way, the practice of the first ecclesia
militans, of the Apostle Paul and his attitude, is put forward as if
it had been commanded or predetermined.

The subsequent glorification of the actual life and teaching of the
first Christians: as if everything had been prescribed beforehand and
had been only a matter of following directions----And as for the
fulfilment of scriptural prophecies: how much of all that is more
than forgery and cooking?

Jesus opposed a real life, a life in truth, to ordinary life: nothing
could have been more foreign to His mind than the somewhat heavy
nonsense of an "eternal Peter,"--of the eternal duration of a single
person. Precisely what He combats is the exaggerated importance of the
"person": how can He wish to immortalise it?

He likewise combats the hierarchy within the community; He never
promises a certain proportion of reward for a certain proportion of
deserts: how can He have meant to teach the doctrine of punishment and
reward in a Beyond?

Christianity is an ingenuous attempt at bringing about a Buddhistic
movement in favour of peace, sprung from the very heart of the
resenting masses ... but transformed by Paul into a mysterious
pagan cult, which was ultimately able to accord with the whole of
State organisation ... and which carries on war, condemns, tortures,
conjures, and hates.

Paul bases his teaching upon the need of mystery felt by the great
masses capable of religious emotions: he seeks a victim, a bloody
phantasmagoria, which may be equal to a contest with the images of
a secret cult: God on the cross, the drinking of blood, the unio
mystica with the "victim."

He seeks the prolongation of life after death (the blessed and atoned
after-life of the individual soul) which he puts in causal relation
with the victim already referred to (according to the type of
Dionysos, Mithras, Osiris).

He feels the necessity of bringing notions of guilt and sin
into the foreground, not a new practice of life (as Jesus Himself
demonstrated and taught), but a new cult, a new belief, a belief in a
miraculous metamorphosis ("Salvation" through belief).

He understood the great needs of the pagan worlds and he gave quite
an absolutely arbitrary picture of those two plain facts, Christ's life
and death. He gave the whole a new accent, altering the equilibrium
everywhere ... he was one of the most active destroyers of primitive
Christianity.

The attempt made on the life of priests and theologians culminated,
thanks to Paul, in a new priesthood and theology--a ruling caste and
a Church.

The attempt made to suppress the fussy importance of the "person,"
culminated in the belief in the eternal "personality" (and in the
anxiety concerning "eternal salvation" ...), and in the most
paradoxical exaggeration of individual egoism.

This is the humorous side of the question--tragic humour: Paul again
set up on a large scale precisely what Jesus had overthrown by His
life. At last, when the Church edifice was complete, it even sanctioned
the existence of the State.

The Church is precisely that against which Jesus inveighed--and against
which He taught His disciples to fight.

A God who died for our sins, salvation through faith, resurrection
after death--all these things are the counterfeit coins of real
Christianity, for which that pernicious blockhead Paul must be held
responsible.

The life which must serve as an example consists in love and
humility; in the abundance of hearty emotion which does not even
exclude the lowliest; in the formal renunciation of all desire of
making its rights felt; in conquest, in the sense of triumph over
oneself; in the belief in salvation in this world, despite all sorrow,
opposition, and death; in forgiveness and the absence of anger and
contempt; in the absence of a desire to be rewarded; in the refusal
to be bound to anybody; abandonment to all that is most spiritual and
intellectual;--in fact, a very proud life controlled by the will of a
servile and poor life.

Once the Church had allowed itself to take over all the Christian
practice, and had formally sanctioned the State,--that kind of life
which Jesus combats and condemns,--it was obliged to lay the sense
of Christianity in other things than early Christian ideals--that is
to say, in the faith in incredible things, in the ceremonial of
prayers, worship, feasts, etc. etc. The notions "sin," "forgiveness,"
"punishment," "reward"--everything, in fact, which had nothing in
common with, and was quite absent from, primitive Christianity, now
comes into the foreground.

An appalling stew of Greek philosophy and Judaism; asceticism;
continual judgments and condemnations; the order of rank, etc.

Christianity has, from the first, always transformed the symbolical
into crude realities:

The antitheses "true life" and "false life" were misunderstood and
changed into "life here" and "life beyond."

The notion "eternal life," as opposed to the personal life which is
ephemeral, is translated into "personal immortality";

The process of fraternising by means of sharing the same food and
drink, after the Hebrew-Arabian manner, is interpreted as the "miracle
of transubstantiation."

"Resurrection" which was intended to mean the entrance to the
"true life," in the sense of being intellectually "born again," becomes
an historical contingency, supposed to take place at some moment after
death;

The teaching of the Son of man as the "Son of God,"--that is to
say, the life-relationship between man and God,--becomes the "second
person of the Trinity," and thus the filial relationship of every
man--even the lowest--to God, is done away with;

Salvation through faith (that is to say, that there is no other way
to this filial relationship to God, save through the practice of life
taught by Christ) becomes transformed into the belief that there is a
miraculous way of atoning for all sin; though not through our own
endeavours, but by means of Christ:

For all these purposes, "Christ on the Cross" had to be interpreted
afresh. The death itself would certainly not be the principal feature
of the event ... it was only another sign pointing to the way in
which one should behave towards the authorities and the laws of the
world--that one was not to defend oneself--this was the exemplary
life.

Concerning the psychology of Paul.--The important fact is Christ's
death. This remains to be explained .... That there may be truth or
error in an explanation never entered these people's heads: one day a
sublime possibility strikes them, "His death might mean so and so"
--and it forthwith becomes so and so. An hypothesis is proved by the
sublime ardour it lends to its discoverer....

"The proof of strength": i.e., a thought is demonstrated by its
effects ("by their fruits," as the Bible ingenuously says); that
which fires enthusiasm must be true,--what one loses one's blood for
must be true--

In every department of this world of thought, the sudden feeling of
power which an idea imparts to him who is responsible for it, is
placed to the credit of that idea:--and as there seems no other way
of honouring an idea than by calling it true, the first epithet it is
honoured with is the word true. ... How could it have any effect
otherwise? It was imagined by some power: if that power were not
real, it could not be the cause of anything.... The thought is then
understood as inspired: the effect it causes has something of the
violent nature of a demoniacal influence--

A thought which a decadent like Paul could not resist and to which he
completely yields, is thus "proved" true!!!

All these holy epileptics and visionaries did not possess a thousandth
part of the honesty in self-criticism with which a philologist,
nowadays, reads a text, or tests the truth of an historical event....
Beside us, such people were moral cretins.

It matters little whether a thing be true, provided it be
effective: total absence of intellectual uprightness. Everything
is good, whether it be lying, slander, or shameless "cooking," provided
it serve to heighten the degree of heat to the point at which people
"believe."

We are face to face with an actual school for the teaching of the
means wherewith men are seduced to a belief: we see systematic
contempt for those spheres whence contradiction might come (that
is to say, for reason, philosophy, wisdom, doubt, and caution); a
shameless praising and glorification of the teaching, with continual
references to the fact that it was God who presented us with it--that
the apostle signifies nothing--that no criticism is brooked, but
only faith, acceptance; that it is the greatest blessing and favour
to receive such a doctrine of salvation; that the state in which one
should receive it, ought to be one of the profoundest thankfulness and
humility....

The resentment which the lowly feel against all those in high places,
is continually turned to account: the fact that this teaching is
revealed to them as the reverse of the wisdom of the world, against
the power of the world, seduces them to it. This teaching convinces
the outcasts and the botched of all sorts and conditions; it promises
blessedness, advantages, and privileges to the most insignificant and
most humble men; it fanaticises the poor, the small, and the foolish,
and fills them with insane vanity, as though they were the meaning
and salt of the earth.

Again, I say, all this cannot be sufficiently contemned, we spare
ourselves a criticism of the teaching; it is sufficient to take
note of the means it uses in order to be aware of the nature of the
phenomenon one is examining. It identified itself with virtue,
it appropriated the whole of the fascinating power of virtue,
shamelessly, for its own purposes ... it availed itself of the power of
paradox, and of the need, manifested by old civilisation, for pepper
and absurdity; it amazed and revolted at the same time; it provoked
persecutions and ill-treatment.

It is the same kind of well-thought-out meanness with which the
Jewish priesthood established their power and built up their Church....

One must be able to discern: (1) that warmth of passion "love" (resting
on a base of ardent sensuality); (2) the thoroughly ignoble character
of Christianity:--the continual exaggeration and verbosity;--the lack
of cool intellectuality and irony;--the unmilitary character of all its
instincts;--the priestly prejudices against manly pride, sensuality,
the sciences, the arts.

Paul: seeks power against ruling Judaism,--his attempt is too
weak.... Transvaluation of the notion "Jew": the "race" is put aside:
but that means denying the very basis of the whole structure. The
"martyr," the "fanatic," the value of all strong belief. Christianity
is the form of decay of the old world, after the latter's collapse,
and it is characterised by the fact that it brings all the most sickly
and unhealthy elements and needs to the top.

Consequently other instincts had to step into the foreground, in
order to constitute an entity, a power able to stand alone--in short,
a condition of tense sorrow was necessary, like that out of which the
Jews had derived their instinct of self-preservation....

The persecution of Christians was invaluable for this purpose.

Unity in the face of danger; the conversion of the masses becomes the
only means of putting an end to the persecution of the individual. (The
notion "conversion" is therefore made as elastic as possible.)

The Christian Judaic life: here resentment did not prevail. The
great persecutions alone could have driven out the passions to that
extent--as also the ardour of love and hate.

When the creatures a man most loves are sacrificed before his eyes for
the sake of his faith, that man becomes aggressive; the triumph of
Christianity is due to its persecutors.

Asceticism is not specifically Christian: this is what Schopenhauer
misunderstood. It only shoots up in Christianity, wherever it would
have existed without that religion.

Melancholy Christianity, the torture and torment of the conscience,
also only a peculiarity of a particular soil, where Christian values
have taken root: it is not Christianity properly speaking. Christianity
has absorbed all the different kinds of diseases which grow from morbid
soil: one could refute it at one blow by showing that it did not know
how to resist any contagion. But that precisely is the essential
feature of it. Christianity is a type of decadence.

The reality on which Christianity was able to build up its power
consisted of the small dispersed Jewish families, with their warmth,
tenderness, and peculiar readiness to help, which, to the whole of the
Roman Empire, was perhaps the most incomprehensible and least familiar
of their characteristics; they were also united by their pride at
being a "chosen people," concealed beneath a cloak of humility, and by
their secret denial of all that was uppermost and that possessed power
and splendour, although there was no shade of envy in their denial.
To have recognised this as a power, to have regarded this blessed
state as communicable, seductive, and infectious even where pagans
were concerned--this constituted Paul's genius: to use up the treasure
of latent energy and cautious happiness for the purposes of "a Jewish
Church of free confession," and to avail himself of all the Jewish
experience, their propaganda, and their expertness in the preservation
of a community under a foreign power--this is what he conceived to
be his duty. He it was who discovered that absolutely unpolitical and
isolated body of paltry people, and their art of asserting themselves
and pushing themselves to the front, by means of a host of acquired
virtues which are made to represent the only forms of virtue ("the
self-preservative measure and weapon of success of a certain class of
man").

The principle of love comes from the small community of Jewish
people: a very passionate soul glows here, beneath the ashes of
humility and wretchedness: it is neither Greek, Indian, nor German. The
song in praise of love which Paul wrote is not Christian; it is the
Jewish flare of that eternal flame which is Semitic. If Christianity
has done anything essentially new in a psychological sense, it is this,
that it has increased the temperature of the soul among those cooler
and more noble races who were at one time at the head of affairs;
it discovered that the most wretched life could be made rich and
invaluable, by means of an elevation of the temperature of the soul....

It is easily understood that a transfer of this sort could not
take place among the ruling classes: the Jews and Christians were at
a disadvantage owing to their bad manners--spiritual strength and
passion, when accompanied by bad manners, only provoke loathing (I
become aware of these bad manners while reading the New Testament). It
was necessary to be related both in baseness and sorrow with this type
of lower manhood in order to feel anything attractive in him.... The
attitude a man maintains towards the New Testament is a test of the
amount of taste he may have for the classics (see Tacitus); he who is
not revolted by it, he who does not feel honestly and deeply that he is
in the presence of a sort of foeda superstitio when reading it, and
who does not draw his hand back so as not to soil his fingers--such a
man does not know what is classical. A man must feel about "the cross"
as Goethe did.[1]

[Footnote 1:

Vieles kann ich ertragen. Die meisten beschwerlichen Dinge
Duld' ich mit ruhigem Mut, wie es ein Gott mir gebeut.
Wenige sind mir jedoch wie Gift und Schlange zuwider;
Viere: Rauch des Tabaks, Wanzen, und Knoblauch und
Goethe's Venetian Epigrams, No. 67.

Much can I bear. Things the most irksome
I endure with such patience as comes from a god.
Four things, however, repulse me like venom:--Tobacco
smoke, garlic, bugs, and the cross.

(TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.)
]

The reaction of paltry people:--Love provides the feeling of highest
power. It should be understood to what extent, not man in general, but
only a certain kind of man is speaking here.

"We are godly in love, we shall be 'the children of God'; God loves us
and wants nothing from us save love"; that is to say: all morality,
obedience, and action, do not produce the same feeling of power and
freedom as love does;--a man does nothing wicked from sheer love, but
he does much more than if he were prompted by obedience and virtue
alone.

Here is the happiness of the herd, the communal feeling in big things
as in small, the living sentiment of unity felt as the sum of the
feeling of life. Helping, caring for, and being useful, constantly
kindle the feeling of power; visible success, the expression of
pleasure, emphasise the feeling of power; pride is not lacking either,
it is felt in the form of the community, the House of God, and the
"chosen people."

As a matter of fact, man has once more experienced an "alteration" of
his personality: this time he called his feeling of love--God. The
awakening of such a feeling must be pictured; it is a sort of ecstasy,
a strange language, a "Gospel"--it was this newness which did not
allow man to attribute love to himself--he thought it was God leading
him on and taking shape in his heart. "God descends among men," one's
neighbour is transfigured and becomes a God (in so far as he provokes
the sentiment of love), Jesus is the neighbour, the moment He is
transfigured in thought into a God, and into a cause provoking the
feeling of power.

Believers are aware that they owe an infinite amount to Christianity,
and therefore conclude that its Founder must have been a man of the
first rank.... This conclusion is false, but it is typical of the
reverents. Regarded objectively, it is, in the first place, just
possible that they are mistaken concerning the extent of their debt to
Christianity: a man's convictions prove nothing concerning the thing
he is convinced about, and in religions they are more likely to give
rise to suspicions.... Secondly, it is possible that the debt owing
to Christianity is not due to its Founder at all, but to the whole
structure, the whole thing--to the Church, etc. The notion "Founder"
is so very equivocal, that it may stand even for the accidental
cause of a movement: the person of the Founder has been inflated in
proportion as the Church has grown: but even this process of veneration
allows of the conclusion that, at one time or other, this Founder was
something exceedingly insecure and doubtful--in the beginning.... Let
any one think of the free and easy way in which Paul treats the
problem of the personality of Jesus, how he almost juggles with it:
some one who died, who was seen after His death,--some one whom the
Jews delivered up to death--all this was only the theme--Paul wrote
the music to it.

The founder of a religion may be quite insignificant--a wax vesta and
no more!

Concerning the psychological problem of Christianity.--The driving
forces are: resentment, popular insurrection, the revolt of the
bungled and the botched. (In Buddhism it is different: it is not born
of resentment. It rather combats resentment because the latter leads
to action!)

This party, which stands for freedom, understands that the abandonment
of antagonism in thought and deed is a condition of distinction and
preservation. Here lies the psychological difficulty which has stood in
the way of Christianity being understood: the force which created it,
urges to a struggle against itself.

Only as a party standing for peace and innocence can this
insurrectionary movement hope to be successful: it must conquer by
means of excessive mildness, sweetness, softness, and its instincts
are aware of this. The feat was to deny and condemn the force, of
which man is the expression, and to press the reverse of that force
continually to the fore, by word and deed.

The pretence of youthfulness.--It is a mistake to imagine that,
with Christianity, an ingenuous and youthful people rose against an
old culture; the story goes that it was out of the lowest levels of
society, where Christianity flourished and shot its roots, that the
more profound source of life gushed forth afresh: but nothing can
be understood of the psychology of Christianity, if it be supposed
that it was the expression of revived youth among a people, or of
the resuscitated strength of a race. It is rather a typical form
of decadence, of moral-softening and of hysteria, amid a general
hotch-potch of races and people that had lost all aims and had grown
weary and sick. The wonderful company which gathered round this
master-seducer of the populace, would not be at all out of place in a
Russian novel: all the diseases of the nerves seem to give one another
a rendezvous in this crowd--the absence of a known duty, the feeling
that everything is nearing its end, that nothing is any longer worth
while, and that contentment lies in dolce far niente.

The power and certainty of the future in the Jew's instinct, its
monstrous will for life and for power, lies in its ruling classes; the
people who upheld primitive Christianity are best distinguished by this
exhausted condition of their instincts. On the one hand, they are
sick of everything; on the other, they are content with each other,
with themselves and for themselves.

Christianity regarded as emancipated Judaism (just as a nobility
which is both racial and indigenous ultimately emancipates itself from
these conditions, and goes in search of kindred elements....).

As a Church (community) on the territory of the State, as an
unpolitical institution.

As life, breeding, practice, art of living.

As a religion of sin (sin committed against God, being the
only recognised kind, and the only cause of all suffering), with a
universal cure for it. There is no sin save against God; what is done
against men, man shall not sit in judgment upon, nor call to account,
except in the name of God. At the same time, all commandments (love):
everything is associated with God, and all acts are performed according
to God's will. Beneath this arrangement there lies exceptional
intelligence (a very narrow life, such as that led by the Esquimaux,
can only be endured by most peaceful and indulgent people: the
Judaeo-Christian dogma turns against sin in favour of the "sinner").

The Jewish priesthood understood how to present everything it claimed
to be right as a divine precept, as an act of obedience to God, and
also to introduce all those things which conduced to preserve Israel
and were the conditions of its existence (for instance: the large
number of "works": circumcision and the cult of sacrifices, as the
very pivot of the national conscience), not as Nature, but as God.

This process continued; within the very heart of Judaism, where the
need of these "works" was not felt (that is to say, as a means of
keeping a race distinct), a priestly sort of man was pictured, whose
bearing towards the aristocracy was like that of "noble nature"; a
sacerdotalism of the soul, which now, in order to throw its opposite
into strong relief, attaches value, not to the "dutiful acts"
themselves, but to the sentiment....

At bottom, the problem was once again, how to make a certain kind of
soul prevail: it was also a popular insurrection in the midst of
a priestly people--a pietistic movement coming from below (sinners,
publicans, women, and children). Jesus of Nazareth was the symbol of
their sect. And again, in order to believe in themselves, they were in
need of a theological transfiguration: they require nothing less than
"the Son of God" in order to create a belief for themselves. And just
as the priesthood had falsified the whole history of Israel, another
attempt was made, here, to alter and falsify the whole history of
mankind in such a way as to make Christianity seem like the most
important event it contained. This movement could have originated only
upon the soil of Judaism, the main feature of which was the confounding
of guilt with sorrow and the reduction of all sin to sin against
God. Of all this, Christianity is the second degree of power.

The symbolism of Christianity is based upon that of Judaism, which
had already transfigured all reality (history, Nature) into a holy and
artificial unreality--which refused to recognise real history, and
which showed no more interest in a natural course of things.

The Jews made the attempt to prevail, after two of their castes--the
warrior and the agricultural castes, had disappeared from their midst.

In this sense they are the "castrated people": they have their priests
and then--their Chandala....

How easily a disturbance occurs among them--an insurrection of their
Chandala. This was the origin of Christianity.

Owing to the fact that they had no knowledge of warriors except as
their masters, they introduced enmity towards the nobles, the men
of honour, pride, and power, and the ruling classes, into their
religion: they are pessimists from indignation....

Thus they created a very important and novel position: the priests in
the van of the Chandala--against the noble classes....

Christianity was the logical conclusion of this movement: even in the
Jewish priesthood, it still scented the existence of the caste, of the
privileged and noble minority--it therefore did away with priests.

Christ is the unit of the Chandala who removes the priest ... the
Chandala who redeems himself....

That is why the French Revolution is the lineal descendant and the
continuator of Christianity-- it is characterised by an instinct of
hate towards castes, nobles, and the last privileges.

The "Christian Ideal" put on the stage with Jewish astuteness--these
are the fundamental psychological forces of its "nature":--

Revolt against the ruling spiritual powers;

The attempt to make those virtues which facilitate the happiness of
the lowly, a standard of all values--in fact, to call God that which
is no more than the self-preservative instinct of that class of man
possessed of least vitality;

Obedience and absolute abstention from war and resistance, justified
by this ideal;

The love of one another as a result of the love of God.

The trick: The denial of all natural mobilia, and their
transference to the spiritual world beyond ... the exploitation of
virtue and its veneration for wholly interested motives, gradual
denial of virtue in everything that is not Christian.

The profound contempt with which the Christian was treated by
the noble people of antiquity, is of the same order as the present
instinctive aversion to Jews: it is the hatred which free and
self-respecting classes feel towards those who wish to creep
in secretly, and who combine an awkward bearing with foolish
self-sufficiency.

The New Testament is the gospel of a completely ignoble species of
man; its pretensions to highest values--yea, to all values, is, as a
matter of fact, revolting--even nowadays.

How little the subject matters! It is the spirit which gives the thing
life! What a quantity of stuffy and sick-room air there is in all that
chatter about "redemption," "love," "blessedness," "faith," "truth,"
"eternal life"! Let any one look into a really pagan book and compare
the two; for instance, in Petronius, nothing at all is done, said,
desired, and valued, which, according to a bigoted Christian estimate,
is not sin, or even deadly sin. And yet how happy one feels with the
purer air, the superior intellectuality, the quicker pace, and the
free overflowing strength which is certain of the future! In the whole
of the New Testament there is not one bouffonnerie: but that fact
alone would suffice to refute any book....

The profound lack of dignity with which all life, which is not
Christian, is condemned: it does not suffice them to think meanly of
their actual opponents, they cannot do with less than a general slander
of everything that is not themselves.... An abject and crafty soul is
in the most perfect harmony with the arrogance of piety, as witness the
early Christians.

The future: they see that they are heavily paid for it.... Theirs is
the muddiest kind of spirit that exists. The whole of Christ's life is
so arranged as to confirm the prophecies of the Scriptures: He behaves
in such wise in order that they may be right....

The deceptive interpretation of the words, the doings, and the
condition of dying people; the natural fear of death, for instance,
is systematically confounded with the supposed fear of what is to
happen "after death." ...

The Christians have done exactly what the Jews did before them.
They introduced what they conceived to be an innovation and a thing
necessary to self-preservation into their Master's teaching, and wove
His life into it They likewise credited Him with all the wisdom of a
maker of proverbs--in short, they represented their everyday life and
activity as an act of obedience, and thus sanctified their propaganda.

What it all depends upon, may be gathered from Paul: it is not much.
What remains is the development of a type of saint, out of the values
which these people regarded as saintly.

The whole of the "doctrine of miracles," including the resurrection, is
the result of self-glorification on the part of the community, which
ascribed to its Master those qualities it ascribed to itself, but in a
higher degree (or, better still, it derived its strength from Him....)

The Christians have never led the life which Jesus commanded them to
lead, and the impudent fable of the "justification by faith," and its
unique and transcendental significance, is only the result of the
Church's lack of courage and will in acknowledging those "works"
which Jesus commanded.

The Buddhist behaves differently from the non-Buddhist; but the
Christian behaves as all the rest of the world does, and possesses a
Christianity of ceremonies and states of the soul.

The profound and contemptible falsehood of Christianity in Europe makes
us deserve the contempt of the Arabs, Hindoos, and Chinese....

Let any one listen to the words of the first German statesman,
concerning that which has preoccupied Europe for the last forty years.

"Faith" or "works"?--But that the "works," the habit of particular
works may engender a certain set of values or thoughts, is just as
natural as it would be unnatural for "works" to proceed from mere
valuations. Man must practise, not how to strengthen feelings of
value, but how to strengthen action: first of all, one must be able
to do something.... Luther's Christian Dilettantism. Faith is an
asses' bridge. The background consists of a profound conviction on
the part of Luther and his peers, that they are enabled to accomplish
Christian "works," a personal fact, disguised under an extreme doubt
as to whether all action is not sin and devil's work, so that the
worth of life depends upon isolated and highly-strained conditions of
inactivity (prayer, effusion, etc.).--Ultimately, Luther would be
right: the instincts which are expressed by the whole bearing of the
reformers are the most brutal that exist. Only in turning absolutely
away from themselves, and in becoming absorbed in the opposite of
themselves, only by means of an illusion ("faith") was existence
endurable to them.

"What was to be done in order to believe?"--an absurd question. That
which is wrong with Christianity is, that it does none of the things
that Christ commanded.

It is a mean life, but seen through the eye of contempt.

The entrance into the real life--a man saves his own life by living
the life of the multitude.

Christianity has become something fundamentally different from what
its Founder wished it to be. It is the great anti-pagan movement of
antiquity, formulated with the use of the life, teaching, and "words"
of the Founder of Christianity, but interpreted quite arbitrarily,
according to a scheme embodying profoundly different needs:
translated into the language of all the subterranean religions then
existing.

It is the rise of Pessimism (whereas Jesus wished to bring the peace
and the happiness of the lambs): and moreover the Pessimism of the
weak, of the inferior, of the suffering, and of the oppressed.

Its mortal enemies are (1) Power, whether in the form of character,
intellect, or taste, and "worldliness"; (2) the "good cheer" of
classical times, the noble levity and scepticism, hard pride, eccentric
dissipation, and cold frugality of the sage, Greek refinement in
manners, words, and form. Its mortal enemy is as much the Roman as
the Greek.

The attempt on the part of anti-paganism to establish itself on
a philosophical basis, and to make its tenets possible: it shows a
taste for the ambiguous figures of antique culture, and above all for
Plato, who was, more than any other, an anti-Hellene and Semite in
instinct.... It also shows a taste for Stoicism, which is essentially
the work of Semites ("dignity" is regarded as severity, law; virtue
is held to be greatness, self-responsibility, authority, greatest
sovereignty over oneself--this is Semitic.) The Stoic is an Arabian
sheik wrapped in Greek togas and notions.

Christianity only resumes the fight which had already been begun
against the classical ideal and noble religion.

As a matter of fact, the whole process of transformation is only
an adaptation to the needs and to the level of intelligence of
religious masses then existing:--those masses which believed in
Isis, Mithras, Dionysos, and the "great mother," and which demanded
the following things of a religion: (1) hopes of a beyond, (2) the
bloody phantasmagoria of animal sacrifice (the mystery), (3) holy
legend and the redeeming deed, (4) asceticism, denial of the
world, superstitious "purification," (5) a hierarchy as a part of
the community. In short, Christianity everywhere fitted the already
prevailing and increasing anti-pagan tendency--those cults which
Epicurus combated,--or more exactly, those religions proper to the
lower herd, women, slaves, and ignoble classes.

The misunderstandings are therefore the following:--

The immortality of the individual;

The assumed existence of another world;

The absurd notion of punishment and expiation in the heart of the
interpretation of existence;

The profanation of the divine nature of man, instead of its
accentuation, and the construction of a very profound chasm, which
can only be crossed by the help of a miracle or by means of the most
thorough self-contempt;

The whole world of corrupted imagination and morbid passion,
instead of a simple and loving life of action, instead of Buddhistic
happiness attainable on earth;

An ecclesiastical order with a priesthood, theology, cults, and
sacraments; in short, everything that Jesus of Nazareth combated;

The miraculous in everything and everybody, superstition too:
while precisely the trait which distinguished Judaism and primitive
Christianity was their repugnance to miracles and their relative
rationalism.

The psychological pre-requisites:--Ignorance and lack of
culture,--the sort of ignorance which has unlearned every kind of
shame: let any one imagine those impudent saints in the heart of
Athens;

The Jewish instinct of a chosen people: they appropriate all the
virtues, without further ado, as their own, and regard the rest of
the world as their opposite; this is a profound sign of spiritual
depravity;

The total lack of real aims and real duties, for which other
virtues are required than those of the bigot--the State undertook
this work for them: and the impudent people still behaved as though
they had no need of the State. "Except ye become as little children"
--oh, how far we are from this psychological ingenuousness!

The Founder of Christianity had to pay dearly for having directed His
teaching at the lowest classes of Jewish society and intelligence. They
understood Him only according to the limitations of their own spirit.
... It was a disgrace to concoct a history of salvation, a personal
God, a personal Saviour, a personal immortality, and to have retained
all the meanness of the "person," and of the "history" of a doctrine
which denies the reality of all that is personal and historical.

The legend of salvation takes the place of the symbolic "now" and "all
time," of the symbolic "here" and "everywhere"; and miracles appear
instead of the psychological symbol.

Nothing is less innocent than the New Testament. The soil from which it
sprang is known.

These people, possessed of an inflexible will to assert themselves, and
who, once they had lost all natural hold on life, and had long existed
without any right to existence, still knew how to prevail by means of
hypotheses which were as unnatural as they were imaginary (calling
themselves the chosen people, the community of saints, the people of
the promised land, and the "Church"): these people made use of their
pia fraus with such skill, and with such "clean consciences," that
one cannot be too cautious when they preach morality. When Jews step
forward as the personification of innocence, the danger must be great.
While reading the New Testament a man should have his small fund of
intelligence, mistrust, and wickedness constantly at hand.

People of the lowest origin, partly mob, outcasts not only from good
society, but also from respectable society; grown away from the
atmosphere of culture, and free from discipline; ignorant, without
even a suspicion of the fact that conscience can also rule in spiritual
matters; in a word--the Jews: an instinctively crafty people, able to
create an advantage, a means of seduction out of every conceivable
hypothesis of superstition, even out of ignorance itself.

I regard Christianity as the most fatal and seductive lie that has ever
yet existed--as the greatest and most impious lie: I can discern the
last sprouts and branches of its ideal beneath every form of disguise,
I decline to enter into any compromise or false position in reference
to it--I urge people to declare open war with it.

The morality of paltry people as the measure of all things: this is
the most repugnant kind of degeneracy that civilisation has ever yet
brought into existence. And this kind of ideal is hanging still,
under the name of "God," over men's heads!!

However modest one's demands may be concerning intellectual
cleanliness, when one touches the New Testament one cannot help
experiencing a sort of inexpressible feeling of discomfort; for the
unbounded cheek with which the least qualified people will have their
say in its pages, in regard to the greatest problems of existence,
and claim to sit in judgment on such matters, exceeds all limits. The
impudent levity with which the most unwieldy problems are spoken of
here (life, the world, God, the purpose of life), as if they were not
problems at all, but the most simple things which these little bigots
know all about!!!

This was the most fatal form of insanity that has ever yet existed on
earth:--when these little lying abortions of bigotry begin laying claim
to the words "God," "last judgment," "truth," "love," "wisdom," "Holy
Spirit," and thereby distinguishing themselves from the rest of the
world; when such men begin to transvalue values to suit themselves, as
though they were the sense, the salt, the standard, and the measure of
all things; then all that one should do is this: build lunatic asylums
for their incarceration. To persecute them was an egregious act of
antique folly: this was taking them too seriously; it was making them
serious.

The whole fatality was made possible by the fact that a similar form
of megalomania was already in existence, the Jewish form (once
the gulf separating the Jews from the Christian-Jews was bridged, the
Christian-Jews were compelled to employ those self-preservative
measures afresh which were discovered by the Jewish instinct, for
their own self-preservation, after having accentuated them); and again
through the fact that Greek moral philosophy had done everything that
could be done to prepare the way for moral-fanaticism, even among
Greeks and Romans, and to render it palatable.... Plato, the great
importer of corruption, who was the first who refused to see Nature
in morality, and who had already deprived the Greek gods of all their
worth by his notion "good" was already tainted with Jewish bigotry
(in Egypt?).

These small virtues of gregarious animals do not by any means lead
to "eternal life": to put them on the stage in such a way, and to
use them for one's own purpose is perhaps very smart; but to him who
keeps his eyes open, even here, it remains, in spite of all, the most
ludicrous performance. A man by no means deserves privileges, either on
earth or in heaven, because he happens to have attained to perfection
in the art of behaving like a good-natured little sheep; at best, he
only remains a dear, absurd little ram with horns--provided, of course,
he does not burst with vanity or excite indignation by assuming the
airs of a supreme judge.

What a terrible glow of false colouring here floods the meanest
virtues--as though they were the reflection of divine qualities!

The natural purpose and utility of every virtue is systematically
hushed up; it can only be valuable in the light of a divine command
or model, or in the light of the good which belongs to a beyond or a
spiritual world. (This is magnificent!--As if it were a question of the
salvation of the soul: but it was a means of making things bearable
here with as many beautiful sentiments as possible.)

The law, which is the fundamentally realistic formula of certain
self-preservative measures of a community, forbids certain actions
that have a definite tendency to jeopardise the welfare of that
community: it does not forbid the attitude of mind which gives rise
to these actions--for in the pursuit of other ends the community
requires these forbidden actions, namely, when it is a matter of
opposing its enemies. The moral idealist now steps forward and says:
"God sees into men's hearts: the action itself counts for nothing;
the reprehensible attitude of mind from which it proceeds must be
extirpated ..." In normal conditions men laugh at such things; it is
only in exceptional cases, when a community lives quite beyond the
need of waging war in order to maintain itself, that an ear is lent to
such things. Any attitude of mind is abandoned, the utility of which
cannot be conceived.

This was the case, for example, when Buddha appeared among a people
that was both peaceable and afflicted with great intellectual weariness.

This was also the case in regard to the first Christian community (as
also the Jewish), the primary condition of which was the absolutely
unpolitical Jewish society. Christianity could grow only upon the
soil of Judaism--that is to say, among a people that had already
renounced the political life, and which led a sort of parasitic
existence within the Roman sphere of government, Christianity goes a
step farther: it allows men to "emasculate" themselves even more; the
circumstances actually favour their doing so.--Nature is expelled
from morality when it is said, "Love ye your enemies": for Nature's
injunction, "Ye shall love your neighbour and hate your enemy,"
has now become senseless in the law (in instinct); now, even the love
a man feels for his neighbour must first be based upon something (a
sort of love of God). God is introduced everywhere, and utility
is withdrawn; the natural origin of morality is denied everywhere:
the veneration of Nature, which lies in acknowledging a natural
morality, is destroyed to the roots....

Whence comes the seductive charm of this emasculate ideal of man? Why
are we not disgusted by it, just as we are disgusted at the thought
of a eunuch?... The answer is obvious: it is not the voice of the
eunuch that revolts us, despite the cruel mutilation of which it is the
result; for, as a matter of fact, it has grown sweeter.... And owing to
the very fact that the "male organ" has been amputated from virtue, its
voice now has a feminine ring, which, formerly, was not to be discerned.

On the other hand, we have only to think of the terrible hardness,
dangers, and accidents to which a life of manly virtues leads--the
life of a Corsican, even at the present day, or that of a heathen Arab
(which resembles the Corsican's life even to the smallest detail:
the Arab's songs might have been written by Corsicans)--in order to
perceive how the most robust type of man was fascinated and moved by
the voluptuous ring of this "goodness" and "purity." ... A pastoral
melody ... an idyll ... the "good man": such things have most effect in
ages when tragedy is abroad.

With this, we have realised to what extent the "idealist" (the ideal
eunuch) also proceeds from a definite reality and is not merely a
visionary.... He has perceived precisely that, for his kind of reality,
a brutal injunction of the sort which prohibits certain actions has no
sense (because the instinct which would urge him to these actions is
weakened, thanks to a long need of practice, and of compulsion to
practise). The castrator formulates a host of new self-preservative
measures for a perfectly definite species of men: in this sense he is
a realist. The means to which he has recourse for establishing his
legislation, are the same as those of ancient legislators: he appeals
to all authorities, to "God," and he exploits the notions "guilt and
punishment"--that is to say, he avails himself of the whole of the
older ideal, but interprets it differently; for instance: punishment is
given a place in the inner self (it is called the pang of conscience).

In practice this kind of man meets with his end the moment the
exceptional conditions favouring his existence cease to prevail--a sort
of insular happiness, like that of Tahiti, and of the little Jews in
the Roman provinces. Their only natural foe is the soil from which
they spring: they must wage war against that, and once more give their
offensive and defensive passions rope in order to be equal to
it: their opponents are the adherents of the old ideal (this kind of
hostility is shown on a grand scale by Paul in relation to Judaism, and
by Luther in relation to the priestly ascetic ideal). The mildest form
of this antagonism is certainly that of the first Buddhists; perhaps
nothing has given rise to so much work, as the enfeeblement and
discouragement of the feeling of antagonism. The struggle against
resentment almost seems the Buddhist's first duty; thus only is his
peace of soul secured. To isolate oneself without bitterness, this
presupposes the existence of a surprisingly mild and sweet order of
men,--saints....

The Astuteness of moral castration.--How is war waged against
the virile passions and valuations? No violent physical means are
available; the war must therefore be one of ruses, spells, and lies--in
short, a "spiritual war."

First recipe: One appropriates virtue in general, and makes it the main
feature of one's ideal; the older ideal is denied and declared to be
the reverse of all ideals. Slander has to be carried to a fine art
for this purpose.

Second recipe: A type of man is set up as a general standard; and
this is projected into all things, behind all things, and behind the
destiny of all things--as God.

Third recipe: The opponents of one's ideal are declared to be the
opponents of God; one arrogates to oneself a right to great pathos,
to power, and a right to curse and to bless.

Fourth recipe: All suffering, all gruesome, terrible, and fatal things
are declared to be the results of opposition to ones ideal--all
suffering is punishment even in the case of one's adherents (except
it be a trial, etc.).

Fifth recipe: One goes so far as to regard Nature as the reverse of
one's ideal, and the lengthy sojourn amid natural conditions is
considered a great trial of patience--a sort of martyrdom; one studies
contempt, both in one's attitudes and one's looks towards all "natural
things."

Sixth recipe: The triumph of anti-naturalism and ideal castration,
the triumph of the world of the pure, good, sinless, and blessed, is
projected into the future as the consummation, the finale, the great
hope, and the "Coming of the Kingdom of God."

I hope that one may still be allowed to laugh at this artificial
hoisting up of a small species of man to the position of an absolute
standard of all things?

What I do not at all like in Jesus of Nazareth and His Apostle Paul,
is that they stuffed so much into the heads of paltry people, as
if their modest virtues were worth so much ado. We have had to pay
dearly for it all; for they brought the most valuable qualities of both
virtue and man into ill repute; they set the guilty conscience and the
self-respect of noble souls at loggerheads, and they led the braver,
more magnanimous, more daring, and more excessive tendencies of strong
souls astray--even to self-destruction.

In the New Testament, and especially in the Gospels, I discern
absolutely no sign of a "Divine" voice: but rather an indirect
form of the most subterranean fury, both in slander and
destructiveness--one of the most dishonest forms of hatred. It lacks
all knowledge of the qualities of a higher nature. It makes an
impudent abuse of all kinds of plausibilities, and the whole stock of
proverbs is used up and foisted upon one in its pages. Was it necessary
to make a God come in order to appeal to those publicans and to say
to them, etc. etc.?

Nothing could be more vulgar than this struggle with the Pharisees,
carried on with a host of absurd and unpractical moral pretences; the
mob, of course, has always been entertained by such feats. Fancy the
reproach of "hypocrisy!" coming from those lips! Nothing could be more
vulgar than this treatment of one's opponents--a most insidious sign of
nobility or its reverse....

Primitive Christianity is the abolition of the State: it prohibits
oaths, military service, courts of justice, self-defence or the defence
of a community, and denies the difference between fellow-countrymen and
strangers, as also the order of castes.

Christs example; He does not withstand those who ill-treat Him; He
does not defend Himself; He does more, He "offers the left cheek"
(to the demand: "Tell us whether thou be the Christ?" He replies:
"Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of heaven"). He forbids His disciples
to defend Him; He calls attention to the fact that He could get help
if He wished to, but will not.

Christianity also means the abolition of society, it prizes
everything that society despises, its very growth takes place among the
outcasts, the condemned, and the leprous of all kinds, as also among
"publicans," "sinners," prostitutes, and the most foolish of men (the
"fisher folk "); it despises the rich, the scholarly, the noble, the
virtuous, and the "punctilious." ...

The war against the noble and the powerful, as it is waged in the New
Testament, is reminiscent of Reynard the Fox and his methods: but
plus the Christian unction and the more absolute refusal to recognise
one's own craftiness.

The Gospel is the announcement that the road to happiness lies open for
the lowly and the poor--that all one has to do is to emancipate one's
self from all institutions, traditions, and the tutelage of the higher
classes. Thus Christianity is no more than the typical teaching of
Socialists.

Property, acquisitions, mother-country, status and rank, tribunals,
the police, the State, the Church, Education, Art, militarism: all
these are so many obstacles in the way of happiness, so many mistakes,
snares, and devil's artifices, on which the Gospel passes sentence--all
this is typical of socialistic doctrines.

Behind all this there is the outburst, the explosion, of a
concentrated loathing of the "masters,"--the instinct which discerns
the happiness of freedom after such long oppression.... (Mostly a
symptom of the fact that the inferior classes have been treated too
humanely, that their tongues already taste a joy which is forbidden
them.... It is not hunger that provokes revolutions, but the fact that
the mob have contracted an appetite en mangeant....)

Let the New Testament only be read as a book of seduction: in it
virtue is appropriated, with the idea that public opinion is best
won with it,--and as a matter of fact it is a very modest kind of
virtue, which recognises only the ideal gregarious animal and nothing
more (including, of course, the herdsmen): a puny, soft, benevolent,
helpful, and gushingly-satisfied kind of virtue which to the outside
world is quite devoid of pretensions,--and which separates the "world"
entirely from itself. The crassest arrogance which fancies that the
destiny of man turns around it, and it alone, and that on the one side
the community of believers represents what is right, and on the other
the world represents what is false and eternally to be reproved and
rejected. The most imbecile hatred of all things in power, which,
however, never goes so far as to touch these things. A kind of inner
detachment which, outwardly, leaves everything as it was (servitude
and slavery; and knowing how to convert everything into a means of
serving God and virtue).

Christianity is possible as the most private form of life; it
presupposes the existence of a narrow, isolated, and absolutely
unpolitical society--it belongs to the conventicle. On the other hand,
a "Christian State," "Christian politics," are pieces of downright
impudence; they are lies, like, for instance, a Christian leadership
of an army, which in the end regards "the God of hosts" as chief of
the staff. Even the Papacy has never been able to carry on politics
in a Christian way...; and when Reformers indulge in politics, as
Luther did, it is well known that they are just as ardent followers of
Machiavelli as any other immoralists or tyrants.

Christianity is still possible at any moment. It is not bound to any
one of the impudent dogmas that have adorned themselves with its name:
it needs neither the teaching of the personal God, nor of sin,
nor of immortality, nor of redemption, nor of faith; it has
absolutely no need whatever of metaphysics, and it needs asceticism and
Christian "natural science" still less. Christianity is a method of
life, not a system of belief. It tells us how we should behave, not
what we should believe.

He who says to-day: "I refuse to be a soldier," "I care not for
tribunals," "I lay no claim to the services of the police," "I will
not do anything that disturbs the peace within me: and if I must
suffer on that account, nothing can so well maintain my inward peace as
suffering"--such a man would be a Christian.

Concerning the history of Christianity.--Continual change of
environment: Christian teaching is thus continually changing its
centre of gravity. The favouring of low and paltry people....
The development of Caritas.... The type "Christian" gradually
adopts everything that it originally rejected (and in the rejection
of which it asserted its right to exist). The Christian becomes a
citizen, a soldier, a judge, a workman, a merchant, a scholar, a
theologian, a priest, a philosopher, a farmer, an artist, a patriot,
a politician, a prince ... he re-enters all those departments of
active life which he had forsworn (he defends himself, he establishes
tribunals, he punishes, he swears, he differentiates between people
and people, he contemns, and he shows anger). The whole life of the
Christian is ultimately exactly that life from which Christ preached
deliverance.... The Church is just as much a factor in the triumph
of the Antichrist, as the modern State and modern Nationalism.... The
Church is the barbarisation of Christianity.

Among the powers that have mastered Christianity are: Judaism
(Paul); Platonism (Augustine); The cult of mystery (the teaching of
salvation, the emblem of the "cross"); Asceticism (hostility towards
"Nature," "Reason," the "senses,"--the Orient ...).

Christianity is a denaturalisation of gregarious morality: under the
power of the most complete misapprehensions and self-deceptions.
Democracy is a more natural form of it, and less sown with falsehood.
It is a fact that the oppressed, the low, and whole mob of slaves and
half-castes, will prevail.

First step: they make themselves free--they detach themselves, at
first in fancy only; they recognise each other; they make themselves
paramount.

Second step: they enter the lists, they demand acknowledgment, equal
rights, "Justice."

Third step: they demand privileges (they draw the representatives of
power over to their side).

Fourth step: they alone want all power, and they have it.

There are three elements in Christianity which must be distinguished:
the oppressed of all kinds, (b) the mediocre of all kinds,
the dissatisfied and diseased of all kinds. The first struggle
against the politically noble and their ideal; the second contend with
the exceptions and those who are in any way privileged (mentally or
physically); the third oppose the natural instinct of the happy and
the sound.

Whenever a triumph is achieved, the second element steps to the fore;
for then Christianity has won over the sound and happy to its side
(as warriors in its cause), likewise the powerful (interested to this
extent in the conquest of the crowd)--and now it is the gregarious
instinct, that mediocre nature which is valuable in every respect,
that now gets its highest sanction through Christianity. This mediocre
nature ultimately becomes so conscious of itself (gains such courage
in regard to its own opinions), that it arrogates to itself even
political power....

Democracy is Christianity made natural: a sort of "return to Nature,"
once Christianity, owing to extreme anti-naturalness, might have been
overcome by the opposite valuation. Result: the aristocratic ideal
begins to lose its natural character ("the higher man," "noble,"
"artist," "passion," "knowledge"; Romanticism as the cult of the
exceptional, genius, etc. etc.).

When the "masters" may also become Christians.--It is of the nature
of a community (race, family, herd, tribe) to regard all those
conditions and aspirations which favour its survival, as in themselves
valuable; for instance: obedience, mutual assistance, respect,
moderation, pity--as also, to suppress everything that happens to
stand in the way of the above.

It is likewise of the nature of the rulers (whether they are
individuals or classes) to patronise and applaud those virtues which
make their subjects amenable and submissive--conditions and
passions which may be utterly different from their own.

The gregarious instinct and the instinct of the rulers sometimes
agree in approving of a certain number of qualities and
conditions,--but for different reasons: the first do so out of direct
egoism, the second out of indirect egoism.

The submission to Christianity on the part of master races is
essentially the result of the conviction that Christianity is a
religion for the herd, that it teaches obedience: in short, that
Christians are more easily ruled than non-Christians. With a hint of
this nature, the Pope, even nowadays, recommends Christian propaganda
to the ruling Sovereign of China.

It should also be added that the seductive power of the Christian ideal
works most strongly upon natures that love danger, adventure, and
contrasts; that love everything that entails a risk, and wherewith a
non plus ultra of powerful feeling may be attained. In this respect,
one has only to think of Saint Theresa, surrounded by the heroic
instincts of her brothers:--Christianity appears in those circumstances
as a dissipation of the will, as strength of will, as a will that is
Quixotic.

CHRISTIAN IDEALS.

War against the Christian ideal, against the doctrine of
"blessedness" and "salvation" as the aims of life, against the
supremacy of the fools, of the pure in heart, of the suffering and of
the botched!

When and where has any man, of any note at all, resembled the
Christian ideal?--at least in the eyes of those who are psychologists
and triers of the heart and reins. Look at all Plutarch's heroes!

Our claim to superiority: we live in an age of Comparisons; we
are able to calculate as men have never yet calculated; in every way
we are history become self-conscious. We enjoy things in a different
way; we suffer in a different way: our instinctive activity is the
comparison of an enormous variety of things. We understand everything;
we experience everything, we no longer have a hostile feeling left
within us. However disastrous the results may be to ourselves, our
plunging and almost lustful inquisitiveness, attacks, unabashed, the
most dangerous of subjects....

"Everything is good"--it gives us pain to say "nay" to anything. We
suffer when we feel that we are sufficiently foolish to make a definite
stand against anything.... At bottom, it is we scholars who to-day are
fulfilling Christ's teaching most thoroughly.

We cannot suppress a certain irony when we contemplate those who think
they have overcome Christianity by means of modern natural science.
Christian values are by no means overcome by such people. "Christ on
the cross" is still the most sublime symbol--even now....

The two great Nihilistic movements are: (a) Buddhism, (b)
Christianity. The latter has only just about reached a state of
culture in which it can fulfil its original object,--it has found its
level,--and now it can manifest itself without disguise.....

We have re-established the Christian ideal, it now only remains to
determine its value.

Which values does it deny? What does the ideal that opposes it
stand for?--Pride, pathos of distance, great responsibility, exuberant
spirits, splendid animalism, the instincts of war and of conquest;
the deification of passion, revenge, cunning, anger, voluptuousness,
adventure, knowledge--the noble ideal is denied: the beauty, wisdom,
power, pomp, and awfulness of the type man: the man who postulates
aims, the "future" man (here Christianity presents itself as the
logical result of Judaism).

Can it be realised?--Yes, of course, when the climatic conditions
are favourable--as in the case of the Indian ideal. Both neglect the
factor work.--It separates a creature from a people, a state, a
civilised community, and jurisdiction; it rejects education, wisdom,
the cultivation of good manners, acquisition and commerce; it cuts
adrift everything which is of use and value to men--by means of an
idiosyncrasy of sentiment it isolates a man. It is non-political,
anti-national, neither aggressive nor defensive,--and only possible
within a strictly-ordered State or state of society, which allows these
holy parasites to flourish at the cost of their neighbours.....

It has now become the will to be happy--and nothing else!
"Blessedness" stands for something self-evident, that no longer
requires any justification--everything else (the way to live and let
live) is only a means to an end....

But what follows is the result of a low order of thought, the fear of
pain, of defilement, of corruption, is great enough to provide ample
grounds for allowing everything to go to the dogs.... This is a poor
way of thinking, and is the sign of an exhausted race; we must not
allow ourselves to be deceived. ("Become as little children." Natures
of the same order: Francis of Assisi, neurotic, epileptic, visionary,
like Jesus.)

The higher man distinguishes himself from the lower by his
fearlessness and his readiness to challenge misfortune: it is a
sign of degeneration when eudemonistic values begin to prevail
(physiological fatigue and enfeeblement of will-power). Christianity,
with its prospect of "blessedness," is the typical attitude of mind of
a suffering and impoverished species of man. Abundant strength will be
active, will suffer, and will go under: to it the bigotry of Christian
salvation is bad music and hieratic posing and vexation.

Poverty, humility, and chastity are dangerous and slanderous ideals;
but like poisons, which are useful cures in the case of certain
diseases, they were also necessary in the time of the Roman Empire.

All ideals are dangerous: because they lower and brand realities; they
are all poisons, but occasionally indispensable as cures.

God created man, happy, idle, innocent, and immortal: our actual life
is a false, decadent, and sinful existence, a punishment.... Suffering,
struggle, work, and death are raised as objections against life, they
make life questionable, unnatural--something that must cease, and for
which one not only requires but also has--remedies!

Since the time of Adam, man has been in an abnormal state: God
Himself delivered up His Son for Adam's sin, in order to put an end
to the abnormal condition of things: the natural character of life
is a curse; to those who believe in Him, Christ restores normal
life: He makes them happy, idle, and innocent. But the world did not
become fruitful without labour; women do not bear children without
pain; illness has not ceased: believers are served just as badly as
unbelievers in this respect. All that has happened is, that man is
delivered from death and sin--two assertions which allow of no
verification, and which are therefore emphasised by the Church with
more than usual heartiness. "He is free from sin,"--not owing to
his own efforts, not owing to a vigorous struggle on his part, but
redeemed by the death of the Saviour,--consequently, perfectly
innocent and paradisaical.

Actual life is nothing more than an illusion (that is to say, a
deception, an insanity). The whole of struggling, fighting, and
real existence--so full of light and shade, is only bad and false:
everybody's duty is to be delivered from it.

"Man, innocent, idle, immortal, and happy"--this concept, which is
the object of the "most supreme desires," must be criticised before
anything else. Why should guilt, work, death, and pain (and, from
the Christian point of view, also knowledge ...) be contrary to
all supreme desires?--The lazy Christian notions: "blessedness,"
"innocence," "immortality."

The eccentric concept "holiness" does not exist--"God" and "man" have
not been divorced from each other. "Miracles" do not exist--such
spheres do not exist: the only one to be considered is the
"intellectual" (that is to say, the symbolically-psychological). As
decadence: a counterpart to "Epicureanism." ... Paradise according to
Greek notions was only "Epicurus' Garden."

A life of this sort lacks a purpose: it strives after nothing;--a
form of the "Epicurean gods"--there is no longer any reason to aim at
anything,--not even at having children:--everything has been done.

They despised the body: they did not reckon with it: nay, more--they
treated it as an enemy. It was their delirium to think that a man
could carry a "beautiful soul" about in a body that was a cadaverous
abortion.... In order to inoculate others with this insanity they
had to present the concept "beautiful soul" in a different way, and
to transvalue the natural value, until, at last, a pale, sickly,
idiotically exalted creature, something angelic, some extreme
perfection and transfiguration was declared to be the higher man.

Ignorance in matters psychological.--The Christian has no nervous
system;--contempt for, and deliberate and wilful turning away from, the
demands of the body, and the naked body; it is assumed that all this
is in keeping with man's nature, and must perforce work the ultimate
good of the soul;--all functions of the body are systematically
reduced to moral values; illness itself is regarded as determined by
morality, it is held to be the result of sin, or it is a trial or a
state of salvation, through which man becomes more perfect than he
could become in a state of health (Pascal's idea); under certain
circumstances, there are wilful attempts at inducing illness.

What in sooth is this struggle "against Nature" on the part of the
Christian? We shall not, of course, let ourselves be deceived by
his words and explanations. It is Nature against something which is
also Nature. With many, it is fear; with others, it is loathing;
with yet others, it is the sign of a certain intellectuality, the
love of a bloodless and passionless ideal; and in the case of the
most superior men, it is love of an abstract Nature--these try to
live up to their ideal. It is easily understood that humiliation in
the place of self-esteem, anxious cautiousness towards the passions,
emancipation from the usual duties (whereby, a higher notion of rank is
created), the incitement to constant war on behalf of enormous issues,
habituation to effusiveness of feelings--all this goes to constitute
a type: in such a type the hypersensitiveness of a perishing body
preponderates; but the nervousness and the inspirations it engenders
are interpreted differently. The taste of this kind of creature
tends either (1) to subtilise, (2) to indulge in bombastic eloquence,
or (3) to go in for extreme feelings. The natural inclinations do
get satisfied, but they are interpreted in a new way; for instance,
as "justification before God," "the feeling of redemption through
grace," every undeniable feeling of pleasure becomes (interpreted
in this way!) pride, voluptuousness, etc. General problem: what will
become of the man who slanders and practically denies and belittles
what is natural? As a matter of fact, the Christian is an example of
exaggerated self-control: in order to tame his passions, he seems to
find it necessary to extirpate or crucify them.

Man did not know himself physiologically throughout the ages his
history covers; he does not even know himself now. The knowledge, for
instance, that man has a nervous system (but no "soul") is still the
privilege of the most educated people. But man is not satisfied, in
this respect, to say he does not know. A man must be very superior to
be able to say: "I do not know this,"--that is to say, to be able to
admit his ignorance.

Suppose he is in pain or in a good mood, he never questions that he
can find the reason of either condition if only he seeks.... In truth,
he cannot find the reason; for he does not even suspect where it
lies.... What happens?... He takes the result of his condition for
its cause; for instance, if he should undertake some work (really
undertaken because his good mood gave him the courage to do so) and
carry it through successfully: behold, the work itself is the reason
of his good mood.... As a matter of fact, his success was determined by
the same cause as that which brought about his good mood--that is to
say, the happy co-ordination of physiological powers and functions.

He feels bad: consequently he cannot overcome a care, a scruple,
or an attitude of self-criticism.... He really fancies that his
disagreeable condition is the result of his scruple, of his "sin," or
of his "self-criticism."

But after profound exhaustion and prostration, a state of recovery sets
in. "How is it possible that I can feel so free, so happy? It is a
miracle; only a God could have effected this change."--Conclusion: "He
has forgiven my sin." ...

From this follow certain practices: in order to provoke feelings of
sinfulness and to prepare the way for crushed spirits it is necessary
to induce a condition of morbidity and nervousness in the body. The
methods of doing this are well known. Of course, nobody suspects
the causal logic of the fact: the maceration of the flesh is
interpreted religiously, it seems like an end in itself, whereas it
is no more than a means of bringing about that morbid state of
indigestion which is known as repentance (the "fixed idea" of sin, the
hypnotising of the hen by-means of the chalk-line "sin").

The mishandling of the body prepares the ground for the required range
of "guilty feelings"--that is to say, for that general state of pain
which demands an explanation....

On the other hand, the method of "salvation" may also develop
from the above: every dissipation of the feelings, whether prayers,
movements, attitudes, or oaths, has been provoked, and exhaustion
follows; very often it is acute, or it appears in the form of
epilepsy. And behind this condition of deep somnolence there come signs
of recovery--or, in religious parlance, "Salvation."

Formerly, the conditions and results of physiological exhaustion were
considered more important than healthy conditions and their results,
and this was owing to the suddenness, fearfulness, and mysteriousness
of the former. Men were terrified by themselves, and postulated the
existence of a higher world. People have ascribed the origin of the
idea of two worlds--one this side of the grave and the other beyond
it--to sleep and dreams, to shadows, to night, and to the fear of
Nature: but the symptoms of physiological exhaustion should, above all,
have been considered.

Ancient religions have quite special methods of disciplining the
pious into states of exhaustion, in which they must experience such
things.... The idea was, that one entered into a new order of things,
where everything ceases to be known.--The semblance of a higher
power....

Sleep is the result of every kind of exhaustion; exhaustion follows
upon all excessive excitement....

In all pessimistic religions and philosophies there is a yearning for
sleep; the very notion "sleep" is deified and worshipped.

In this case the exhaustion is racial; sleep regarded psychologically
is only a symbol of a much deeper and longer compulsion to rest....
In praxi it is death which rules here in the seductive image of its
brother sleep....

The whole of the Christian training in repentance and redemption may
be regarded as a folie circulaire arbitrarily produced; though,
of course, it can be produced only in people who are predisposed to
it--that is to say, who have morbid tendencies in their constitutions.

Against remorse and its purely psychical treatment.--To be unable
to have done with an experience is already a sign of decadence.
This reopening of old wounds, this wallowing in self-contempt and
depression, is an additional form of disease; no "salvation of the
soul" ever results from it, but only a new kind of spiritual illness....

These "conditions of salvation" of which the Christian is conscious are
merely variations of the same diseased state--the interpretation of an
attack of epilepsy by means of a particular formula which is provided,
not by science, but by religious mania.

When a man is ill his very goodness is sickly.... By far the
greatest portion of the psychical apparatus which Christianity has
used, is now classed among the various forms of hysteria and epilepsy.

The whole process of spiritual healing must be remodelled on a
physiological basis: the "sting of conscience" as such is an obstacle
in the way of recovery--as soon as possible the attempt must be made
to counterbalance everything by means of new actions, so that there
may be an escape from the morbidness of self-torture.... The purely
psychical practices of the Church and of the various sects should be
decried as dangerous to the health. No invalid is ever cured by prayers
or by the exorcising of evil spirits: the states of "repose" which
follow upon such methods of treatment, by no means inspire confidence,
in the psychological sense....

A man is healthy when he can laugh at the seriousness and ardour with
which he has allowed himself to be hypnotised to any extent by any
detail in his life--when his remorse seems to him like the action of a
dog biting a stone--when he is ashamed of his repentance.

The purely psychological and religious practices, which have existed
hitherto, only led to an alteration in the symptoms: according to
them a man had recovered when he bowed before the cross, and swore
that in future he would be a good man.... But a criminal, who, with
a certain gloomy seriousness cleaves to his fate and refuses to
malign his deed once it is done, has more spiritual health....
The criminals with whom Dostoiewsky associated in prison, were all,
without exception, unbroken natures,--are they not a hundred times more
valuable than a "broken-spirited" Christian?

(For the treatment of pangs of conscience I recommend Mitchell's
Treatment.[2])

[Footnote 2: TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.--In The New Sydenham Society's Lexicon
of Medicine and the Allied Sciences, the following description of
Mitchell's treatment is to be found: "A method of treating cases of
neurasthenia and hysteria ... by removal from home, rest in bed,
massage twice a day, electrical excitation of the muscles, and
excessive feeding, at first with milk."]

A pang of conscience in a man is a sign that his character is not
yet equal to his deed. There is such a thing as a pang of conscience
after good deeds: in this case it is their unfamiliarity, their
incompatibility with an old environment.

Against remorse.--I do not like this form of cowardice in regard to
one's own actions, one must not leave one's self in the lurch under
the pressure of sudden shame or distress. Extreme pride is much more
fitting here. What is the good of it all in the end! No deed gets
undone because it is regretted, no more than because it is "forgiven"
or "expiated." A man must be a theologian in order to believe in
a power that erases faults: we immoralists prefer to disbelieve
in "faults." We believe that all deeds, of what kind soever, are
identically the same at root; just as deeds which turn against us
may be useful from an economical point of view, and even generally
desirable. In certain individual cases, we admit that we might well
have been spared a given action; the circumstances alone predisposed
us in its favour. Which of us, if favoured by circumstances, would
not already have committed every possible crime?... That is why one
should never say: "Thou shouldst never have done such and such a
thing," but only: "How strange it is that I have not done such and
such a thing hundreds of times already!"--As a matter of fact, only
a very small number of acts are typical acts and real epitomes of
a personality, and seeing what a small number of people really are
personalities, a single act very rarely characterises a man. Acts
are mostly dictated by circumstances; they are superficial or merely
reflex movements performed in response to a stimulus, long before the
depths of our beings are affected or consulted in the matter. A fit of
temper, a gesture, a blow with a knife: how little of the individual
resides in these acts!--A deed very often brings a sort of stupor or
feeling of constraint in its wake: so that the agent feels almost
spellbound at its recollection, or as though he belonged to it,
and were not an independent creature. This mental disorder, which is
a form of hypnotism, must be resisted at all costs: surely a single
deed, whatever it be, when it is compared with all one has done, is
nothing, and may be deducted from the sum without making the account
wrong. The unfair interest which society manifests in controlling the
whole of our lives in one direction, as though the very purpose of its
existence were to cultivate a certain individual act, should not infect
the man of action: but unfortunately this happens almost continually.
The reason of this is, that every deed, if followed by unexpected
consequences, leads to a certain mental disturbance, no matter whether
the consequences be good or bad. Behold a lover who has been given a
promise, or a poet while he is receiving applause from an audience:
as far as intellectual torpor is concerned, these men are in no way
different from the anarchist who is suddenly confronted by a detective
bearing a search warrant.

There are some acts which are unworthy of us: acts which, if they
were regarded as typical, would set us down as belonging to a lower
class of man. The one fault that has to be avoided here, is to regard
them as typical. There is another kind of act of which we are
unworthy: exceptional acts, born of a particular abundance of happiness
and health; they are the highest waves of our spring tides, driven to
an unusual height by a storm--an accident: such acts and "deeds" are
also not typical. An artist should never be judged according to the
measure of his works.

A. In proportion as Christianity seems necessary to-day, man is still
wild and fatal....

B. In another sense, it is not necessary, but extremely dangerous,
though it is captivating and seductive, because it corresponds with
the morbid character of whole classes and types of modern humanity,
... they simply follow their inclinations when they aspire to
Christianity--they are decadents of all kinds.

A and B must be kept very sharply apart. In the case of A,
Christianity is a cure, or at least a taming process (under certain
circumstances it serves the purpose of making people ill: and this is
sometimes useful as a means of subduing savage and brutal natures).
In the case of B, it is a symptom of illness itself, it renders the
state of decadence more acute; in this case it stands opposed to
a corroborating system of treatment, it is the invalid's instinct
standing against that which would be most salutary to him.

On one side there are the serious, the dignified, and reflective
people: and on the other the barbarous, the unclean, and the
irresponsible beasts: it is merely a question of taming animals--and
in this case the tamer must be hard, terrible, and awe-inspiring, at
least to his beasts.

All essential requirements must be imposed upon the unruly creatures
with almost brutal distinctness--that is to say, magnified a thousand
times.

Even the fulfilment of the requirement must be presented in the
coarsest way possible, so that it may command respect, as in the case
of the spiritualisation of the Brahmins. The struggle with the rabble
and the herd. If any degree of tameness and order has been reached,
the chasm separating these purified and regenerated people from the
terrible remainder must have been bridged....

This chasm is a means of increasing self-respect in higher castes,
and of confirming their belief in that which they represent--hence
the Chandala. Contempt and its excess are perfectly correct
psychologically--that is to say, magnified a hundred times, so that it
may at least be felt.

The struggle against brutal instincts is quite different from
the struggle against morbid instincts; it may even be a means
of overcoming brutality by making the brutes ill. The psychical
treatment practised by Christianity is often nothing more than the
process of converting a brute into a sick and therefore tame animal.

The struggle against raw and savage natures must be a struggle with
weapons which are able to affect such natures: superstitions and such
means are therefore indispensable and essential.

Our age, in a certain sense, is mature (that is to say, decadent),
just as Buddha's was.... That is why a sort of Christianity is possible
without all the absurd dogmas (the most repulsive offshoots of ancient
hybridism).

Supposing it were impossible to disprove Christianity, Pascal thinks,
in view of the terrible possibility that it may be true, that it is
in the highest degree prudent to be a Christian. As a proof of how
much Christianity has lost of its terrible nature, to-day we find that
other attempt to justify it, which consists in asserting, that even if
it were a mistake, it nevertheless provides the greatest advantages
and pleasures for its adherents throughout their lives:--it therefore
seems that this belief should be upheld owing to the peace and quiet
it ensures--not owing to the terror of a threatening possibility, but
rather out of fear of a life that has lost its charm. This hedonistic
turn of thought, which uses happiness as a proof, is a symptom of
decline: it takes the place of the proof resulting from power or from
that which to the Christian mind is most terrible--namely, fear. With
this new interpretation, Christianity is, as a matter of fact, nearing
its stage of exhaustion. People are satisfied with a Christianity which
is an opiate, because they no longer have the strength to seek, to
struggle, to dare, to stand alone, nor to take up Pascal's position and
to share that gloomily brooding self-contempt, that belief in human
unworthiness, and that anxiety which believes that it "may be damned."
But a Christianity the chief object of which is to soothe diseased
nerves, does not require the terrible solution consisting of a "God
on the cross"; that is why Buddhism is secretly gaining ground all
over Europe.

The humour of European culture: people regard one thing as true, but do
the other. For instance, what is the use of all the art of reading
and criticising, if the ecclesiastical interpretation of the Bible,
whether according to Catholics or Protestants, is still upheld!

No one is sufficiently aware of the barbarity of the notions among
which we Europeans still live. To think that men have been able to
believe that the "Salvation of the soul" depended upon a book!... And I
am told that this is still believed.

What is the good of all scientific education, all criticism and all
hermeneutics, if such nonsense as the Church's interpretation of the
Bible has not yet turned the colours of our bodies permanently into the
red of shame?

Subject for reflection: To what extent does the fatal belief in
"Divine Providence"--the most paralysing belief for both the hand
and the understanding that has ever existed--continue to prevail;
to what extent have the Christian hypothesis and interpretation of
Life continued their lives under the cover of terms like "Nature,"
"Progress," "perfectionment," "Darwinism," or beneath the superstition
that there is a certain relation between happiness and virtue,
unhappiness and sin? That absurd belief in the course of things, in
"Life" and in the "instinct of Life"; that foolish resignation which
arises from the notion that if only every one did his duty all would
go well--all this sort of thing can only have a meaning if one assumes
that there is a direction of things sub specie boni. Even fatalism,
our present form of philosophical sensibility, is the result of a
long belief in Divine Providence, an unconscious result: as though it
were nothing to do with us how everything goes! (As though we might
let things take their own course; the individual being only a modus
of the absolute reality.)

It is the height of psychological falsity on the part of man to imagine
a being according to his own petty standard, who is a beginning, a
"thing-in-itself," and who appears to him good, wise, mighty, and
precious; for thus he suppresses in thoughts all the causality
by means of which every kind of goodness, wisdom, and power comes
into existence and has value. In short, elements of the most recent
and most conditional origin were regarded not as evolved, but as
spontaneously generated and "things-in-themselves," and perhaps as
the cause of all things.... Experience teaches us that, in every case
in which a man has means elevated the interests of the species above
those of the individual. Its real historical effect, its fatal
effect, remains precisely the increase of egotism, of individual
egotism, to excess (to the extreme which consists in the belief in
individual immortality). The individual was made so important and so
absolute, by means of Christian values, that he could no longer be
sacrificed, despite the fact that the species can only be maintained
by human sacrifices. All "souls" became equal before God: but this
is the most pernicious of all valuations! If one regards individuals
as equals, the demands of the species are ignored, and a process is
initiated which ultimately leads to its ruin. Christianity is the
reverse of the principle of selection. If the degenerate and sick
man ("the Christian") is to be of the same value as the healthy man
("the pagan"), or if he is even to be valued higher than the latter,
as Pascal's view of health and sickness would have us value him, the
natural course of evolution is thwarted and the unnatural becomes
law.... In practice this general love of mankind is nothing more
than deliberately favouring all the suffering, the botched, and the
degenerate: it is this love that has reduced and weakened the power,
responsibility, and lofty duty of sacrificing men. According to the
scheme of Christian values, all that remained was the alternative
of self-sacrifice, but this vestige of human sacrifice, which
Christianity conceded and even recommended, has no meaning when
regarded in the light of rearing a whole species. The prosperity of the
species is by no means affected by the sacrifice of one individual
(whether in the monastic and ascetic manner, or by means of crosses,
stakes, and scaffolds, as the "martyrs" of error). What the species
requires is the suppression of the physiologically botched, the
weak and the degenerate: but it was precisely to these people that
Christianity appealed as a preservative force, it simply strengthened
that natural and very strong instinct of all the weak which bids them
protect, maintain, and mutually support each other. What is Christian
"virtue" and "love of men," if not precisely this mutual assistance
with a view to survival, this solidarity of the weak, this thwarting of
selection? What is Christian altruism, if it is not the mob-egotism of
the weak which divines that, if everybody looks after everybody else,
every individual will be preserved for a longer period of time?... He
who does not consider this attitude of mind as immoral, as a crime
against life, himself belongs to the sickly crowd, and also shares
their instincts.... Genuine love of mankind exacts sacrifice for
the good of the species--it is hard, full of self-control, because
it needs human sacrifices. And this pseudo-humanity which is called
Christianity, would fain establish the rule that nobody should be
sacrificed.

Nothing could be more useful and deserves more promotion than
systematic Nihilism in action.--As I understand the phenomena of
Christianity and pessimism, this is what they say: "We are ripe for
nonentity, for us it is reasonable not to be." This hint from "reason"
in this case, is simply the voice of selective Nature.

On the other hand, what deserves the most rigorous condemnation, is
the ambiguous and cowardly infirmity of purpose of a religion like
Christianity,--or rather like the Church,--which, instead of
recommending death and self-destruction, actually protects all the
botched and bungled, and encourages them to propagate their kind.

Problem: with what kind of means could one lead up to a severe form of
really contagious Nihilism--a Nihilism which would teach and practise
voluntary death with scientific conscientiousness (and not the feeble
continuation of a vegetative sort of life with false hopes of a life
after death)?

Christianity cannot be sufficiently condemned for having depreciated
the value of a great cleansing Nihilistic movement (like the one
which was probably in the process of formation), by its teaching of
the immortality of the private individual, as also by the hopes of
resurrection which it held out: that is to say, by dissuading people
from performing the deed of Nihilism which is suicide.... In the
latter's place it puts lingering suicide, and gradually a puny, meagre,
but durable life; gradually a perfectly ordinary, bourgeois, mediocre
life, etc.

Christian moral quackery.--Pity and contempt succeed each other at
short intervals, and at the sight of them I feel as indignant as if I
were in the presence of the most despicable crime. Here error is made
a duty--a virtue, misapprehension has become a knack, the destructive
instinct is systematised under the name of "redemption"; here every
operation becomes a wound, an amputation of those very organs whose
energy would be the prerequisite to a return of health. And in the
best of cases no cure is effected; all that is done is to exchange one
set of evil symptoms for another set.... And this pernicious nonsense,
this systematised profanation and castration of life, passes for
holy and sacred; to be in its service, to be an instrument of this
art of healing--that is to say, to be a priest, is to be rendered
distinguished, reverent, holy, and sacred. God alone could have been
the Author of this supreme art of healing; redemption is only possible
as a revelation, as an act of grace, as an unearned gift, made by the
Creator Himself.

Proposition I.: Spiritual healthiness is regarded as morbid, and
creates suspicion....

Proposition II.: The prerequisites of a strong, exuberant life--strong
desires and passions--are reckoned as objections against strong and
exuberant life.

Proposition III.: Everything which threatens danger to man, and which
can overcome and ruin him, is evil--and should be torn root and branch
from his soul.

Proposition IV.: Man converted into a weak creature, inoffensive to
himself and others, crushed by humility and modesty, and conscious of
his weakness,--in fact, the "sinner,"--this is the desirable type, and
one which one can produce by means of a little spiritual surgery....

What is it I protest against? That people should regard this paltry and
peaceful mediocrity, this spiritual equilibrium which knows nothing
of the fine impulses of great accumulations of strength, as something
high, or possibly as the standard of all things.

Bacon of Verulam says: Infimarum virtutum apud vulgus laus est,
mediarum admiratio, supremarum sensus nullus. Christianity as a
religion, however, belongs to the vulgus: it has no feeling for the
highest kind of virtus.

Let us see what the "genuine Christian" does of all the things which
his instincts forbid him to do:--he covers beauty, pride, riches,
self-reliance, brilliancy, knowledge, and power with suspicion and
mud--in short, all culture: his object is to deprive the latter of
its clean conscience.

The attacks made upon Christianity, hitherto, have been not only timid
but false. So long as Christian morality was not felt to be a capital
crime against Life, its apologists had a good time. The question
concerning the mere "truth" of Christianity--whether in regard to the
existence of its God, or to the legendary history of its origin, not to
speak of its astronomy and natural science--is quite beside the point
so long as no inquiry is made into the value of Christian morality.
Are Christian morals worth anything, or are they a profanation and an
outrage, despite all the arts of holiness and seduction with which they
are enforced? The question concerning the truth of the religion may be
met by all sorts of subterfuges; and the most fervent believers can,
in the end, avail themselves of the logic used by their opponents, in
order to create a right for their side to assert that certain things
are irrefutable--that is to say, they transcend the means employed
to refute them (nowadays this trick of dialectics is called "Kantian
Criticism").

Christianity should never be forgiven for having ruined such men as
Pascal. This is precisely what should be combated in Christianity,
namely, that it has the will to break the spirit of the strongest
and noblest natures. One should take no rest until this thing is
utterly destroyed:--the ideal of mankind which Christianity advances,
the demands it makes upon men, and its "Nay" and "Yea" relative to
humanity. The whole of the remaining absurdities, that is to say,
Christian fable, Christian cobweb-spinning in ideas and principles,
and Christian theology, do not concern us; they might be a thousand
times more absurd and we should not raise a finger to destroy them.
But what we do stand up against, is that ideal which, thanks to its
morbid beauty and feminine seductiveness, thanks to its insidious and
slanderous eloquence, appeals to all the cowardices and vanities of
wearied souls,--and the strongest have their moments of fatigue,--as
though all that which seems most useful and desirable at such
moments--that is to say, confidence, artlessness, modesty, patience,
love of one's like, resignation, submission to God, and a sort of
self-surrender--were useful and desirable per se; as though the puny,
modest abortion which in these creatures takes the place of a soul,
this virtuous, mediocre animal and sheep of the flock--which deigns to
call itself man, were not only to take precedence of the stronger, more
evil, more passionate, more defiant, and more prodigal type of man, who
by virtue of these very qualities is exposed to a hundred times more
dangers than the former, but were actually to stand as an ideal for man
in general, as a goal, a measure--the highest desideratum. The creation
of this ideal was the most appalling temptation that had ever
been put in the way of mankind; for, with it, the stronger and more
successful exceptions, the lucky cases among men, in which the will
to power and to growth leads the whole species "man" one step farther
forward, this type was threatened with disaster. By means of the values
of this ideal, the growth of such higher men would be checked at the
root. For these men, owing to their superior demands and duties,
readily accept a more dangerous life (speaking economically, it is a
case of an increase in the costs of the undertaking coinciding with
a greater chance of failure). What is it we combat in Christianity?
That it aims at destroying the strong, at breaking their spirit, at
exploiting their moments of weariness and debility, at converting
their proud assurance into anxiety and conscience-trouble; that it
knows how to poison the noblest instincts and to infect them with
disease, until their strength, their will to power, turns inwards,
against themselves--until the strong perish through their excessive
self-contempt and self-immolation: that gruesome way of perishing, of
which Pascal is the most famous example.

II.

A CRITICISM OF MORALITY.

THE ORIGIN OF MORAL VALUATIONS.

This is an attempt at investigating morality without being affected by
its charm, and not without some mistrust in regard to the beguiling
beauty of its attitudes and looks. A world which we can admire, which
is in keeping with our capacity for worship--which is continually
demonstrating itself--in small things or in large: this is the
Christian standpoint which is common to us all.

But owing to an increase in our astuteness, in our mistrust, and in our
scientific spirit (also through a more developed instinct for truth,
which again is due to Christian influence), this interpretation has
grown ever less and less tenable for us.

The craftiest of subterfuges: Kantian criticism. The intellect not
only denies itself every right to interpret things in that way, but
also to reject the interpretation once it has been made. People are
satisfied with a greater demand upon their credulity and faith, with
a renunciation of all right to reason concerning the proof of their
creed, with an intangible and superior "Ideal" (God) as a stop-gap.

The Hegelian subterfuge, a continuation of the Platonic, a piece
of romanticism and reaction, and at the same time a symptom of
the historical sense of a new power: "Spirit" itself is the
"self-revealing and self-realising ideal": we believe that in the
"process of, development" an ever greater proportion of this ideal is
being manifested--thus the ideal is being realised, faith is vested in
the future into which all its noble needs are projected and in which
they are being worshipped.

In short:--

God is unknowable to us and not to be demonstrated by us (the
concealed meaning behind the whole of the epistemological movement);

God may be demonstrated, but as something evolving, and we are
part of it, as our pressing desire for an ideal proves (the concealed
meaning behind the historical movement).

It should be observed that criticism is never levelled at the ideal
itself, but only at the problem which gives rise to a controversy
concerning the ideal--that is to say, why it has not yet been realised,
or why it is not demonstrable in small things as in great.

It makes all the difference: whether a man recognises this state of
distress as such owing to a passion or to a yearning in himself, or
whether it comes home to him as a problem which he arrives at only by
straining his thinking powers and his historical imagination to the
utmost.

Away from the religious and philosophical points of view we find the
same phenomena. Utilitarianism (socialism and democracy) criticises
the origin of moral valuations, though it believes in them just as
much as the Christian does. (What guilelessness! As if morality could
remain when the sanctioning deity is no longer present! The belief in
a "Beyond" is absolutely necessary, if the faith in morality is to be
maintained.)

Fundamental problem: whence comes this almighty power of Faith?
Whence this faith in morality? (It is betrayed by the fact that even
the fundamental conditions of life are falsely interpreted in favour of
it: despite our knowledge of plants and animals. "Self-preservation":
the Darwinian prospect of a reconciliation of the altruistic and
egotistic principles.)

An inquiry into the origin of our moral valuations and tables of
law has absolutely nothing to do with the criticism of them, though
people persist in believing it has; the two matters lie quite apart,
notwithstanding the fact that the knowledge of the pudenda origo
of a valuation does diminish its prestige, and prepares the way to a
critical attitude and spirit towards it.

What is the actual worth of our valuations and tables of moral laws?
What is the outcome of their dominion? For whom? In relation to
what?--answer: for Life. But what is Life? A new and more definite
concept of what "Life" is, becomes necessary here. My formula of this
concept is: Life is Will to Power.

What is the meaning of the very act of valuing? Does it point back to
another, metaphysical world, or does it point down? (As Kant believed,
who lived in a period which preceded the great historical movement.)
In short: what is its origin? Or had it no human "origin"?--Answer:
moral valuations are a sort of explanation, they constitute a method
of interpreting. Interpretation in itself is a symptom of definite
physiological conditions, as also of a definite spiritual level of
ruling judgments. What is it that interprets?--Our passions.

All virtues should be looked upon as physiological conditions: the
principal organic functions, more particularly, should be considered
necessary and good. All virtues are really refined passions and
elevated physiological conditions.

Pity and philanthropy may be regarded as the developments of
sexual relations,--justice as the development of the passion for
revenge,--virtue as the love of resistance, the will to power,--honour
as an acknowledgment of an equal, or of an equally powerful, force.

Under "Morality" I understand a system of valuations which is in
relation with the conditions of a creature's life.

Formerly it was said of every form of morality, "Ye shall know them by
their fruits." I say of every form of morality: "It is a fruit, and
from it I learn the Soil out of which it grew."

I have tried to understand all moral judgments as symptoms and a
language of signs in which the processes of physiological prosperity
or the reverse, as also the consciousness of the conditions of
preservation and growth, are betrayed--a mode of interpretation equal
in worth to astrology, prejudices, created by instincts (peculiar
to races, communities, and different stages of existence, as, for
instance, youth or decay, etc.).

Applying this principle to the morality of Christian Europe more
particularly, we find that our moral values are signs of decline, of a
disbelief in Life, and of a preparation for pessimism.

My leading doctrine is this: there are no moral phenomena, but only a
moral interpretation of phenomena. The origin of this interpretation
itself lies beyond the pale of morality.

What is the meaning of the fact that we have imagined a
contradiction in existence? This is of paramount importance: behind
all other valuations those moral valuations stand commandingly.
Supposing they disappear, according to what standard shall we then
measure? And then of what value would knowledge be, etc. etc.???

A point of view: in all valuations there is a definite purpose:
the preservation of an individual, a community, a race, a state,
a church, a belief, or a culture.--Thanks to the fact that people
forget that all valuing has a purpose, one and the same man may swarm
with a host of contradictory valuations, and therefore with a host of
contradictory impulses. This is the expression of disease in man as
opposed to the health of animals, in which all the instincts answer
certain definite purposes.

This creature full of contradictions, however, has in his being a grand
method of acquiring knowledge: he feels the pros and cons, he elevates
himself to Justice--that is to say, to the ascertaining of principles
beyond the valuations good and evil.

The wisest man would thus be the richest in contradictions, he would
also be gifted with mental antennae wherewith he could understand all
kinds of men; and with it all he would have his great moments, when all
the chords in his being would ring in splendid unison--the rarest of
accidents even in us! A sort of planetary movement.

"To will" is to will an object. But "object," as an idea, involves
a valuation. Whence do valuations originate? Is a permanent norm,
"pleasant or painful," their basis?

But in an incalculable number of cases we first of all make a thing
painful, by investing it with a valuation.

The compass of moral valuations: they play a part in almost every
mental impression. To us the world is coloured by them.

We have imagined the purpose and value of all things: owing to this
we possess an enormous fund of latent power, but the study of
comparative values teaches us that values which were actually opposed
to each other have been held in high esteem, and that there have been
many tables of laws (they could not, therefore, have been worth
anything per se).

The analysis of individual tables of laws revealed the fact that they
were framed (often very badly) as the conditions of existence for
limited groups of people, to ensure their maintenance.

Upon examining modern men, we found that there are a large number
of very different values to hand, and that they no longer contain
any creative power--the fundamental principle: "the condition of
existence" is now quite divorced from the moral values. It is much
more superfluous and not nearly so painful. It becomes an arbitrary
matter. Chaos.

Who creates the goal which stands above mankind kind and above the
individual? Formerly morality was a preservative measure: but nobody
wants to preserve any longer, there is nothing to preserve. Thus we
are reduced to an experimental morality, each must postulate a goal
for himself.

What is the criterion of a moral action? (1) Its disinterestedness,
its universal acceptation, etc. But this is parlour-morality. Races
must be studied and observed, and, in each case, the criterion must be
discovered, as also the thing it expresses: a belief such as: "This
particular attitude or behaviour belongs to the principal condition of
our existence." Immoral means "that which brings about ruin." Now all
societies in which these principles were discovered have met with their
ruin: a few of these principles have been used and used again, because
every newly established community required them; this was the case, for
instance, with "Thou shalt not steal." In ages when people could not be
expected to show any marked social instinct (as, for instance, in the
age of the Roman Empire) the latter was, religiously speaking, directed
towards the idea of "spiritual salvation," or, in philosophical
parlance, towards "the greatest happiness." For even the philosophers
of Greece did not feel any more for their polis.

The necessity of false values.--A judgment may be refuted when it is
shown that it was conditioned: but the necessity of retaining it is
not thereby cancelled. Reasons can no more eradicate false values than
they can alter astigmatism in a man's eyes.

The need of their existence must be understood: they are the result
of causes which have nothing to do with reasoning.

To see and reveal the problem of morality seems to me to be the new
task and the principal thing of all. I deny that this has been done by
moral philosophies heretofore.

How false and deceptive men have always been concerning the fundamental
facts of their inner world! Here to have no eye; here to hold one's
tongue, and here to open one's mouth.

There seems to be no knowledge or consciousness of the many
revolutions that have taken place in moral judgments, and of
the number of times that "evil" has really and seriously been
christened "good" and vice versa. I myself pointed to one of these
transformations with the words "Sittlichkeit der Sitte."[3] Even
conscience has changed its sphere: formerly there was such a thing as
a gregarious pang of conscience.

[Footnote 3: The morality of custom.]

A. Morality as the work of Immorality.

In order that moral values may attain to supremacy, a host of
immoral forces and passions must assist them.

The establishment of moral values is the work of immoral passions
and considerations.

B. Morality as the work of error.

C. 'Morality gradually contradicts itself. Requital--Truthfulness,
Doubt, epocheh, Judging. The "Immorality" of belief in morality.

The steps:--

Absolute dominion of morality: all biological phenomena measured and
judged according to its values.

The attempt to identify Life with morality (symptom of awakened
scepticism: morality must no longer be regarded as the opposite of
Life); many means are sought--even a transcendental one.

The opposition of Life and Morality. Morality condemned and
sentenced by Life.

D. To what extent was morality dangerous to Life?

It depreciated the joy of living and the gratitude felt towards
Life, etc.

It checked the tendency to beautify and to ennoble Life.

It checked the knowledge of Life.

It checked the unfolding of Life, because it tried to set the
highest phenomena thereof at variance with itself.

E. Contra-account: the usefulness of morality to Life.

Morality may be a preservative measure for the general whole, it
may be a process of uniting dispersed members: it is useful as an agent
in the production of the man who is a "tool."

Morality may be a preservative measure mitigating the inner danger
threatening man from the direction of his passions: it is useful to
"mediocre people."

Morality may be a preservative measure resisting the life-poisoning
influences of profound sorrow and bitterness: it is useful to the
"sufferers."

Morality may be a preservative measure opposed to the terrible
outbursts of the mighty: it is useful to the "lowly."

It is an excellent thing when one can use the expressions "right" and
"wrong" in a definite, narrow, and "bourgeois" sense, as for instance
in the sentence: "Do right and fear no one";[4]--that is to say, to
do one's duty, according to the rough scheme of life within the limit
of which a community exists.--Let us not think meanly of what a few
thousand years of morality have inculcated upon our minds.

[Footnote 4: "Thue Recht und scheue Niemand."]

Two types of morality must not be confounded: the morality with which
the instinct that has remained healthy defends itself from incipient
decadence, and the other morality by means of which this decadence
asserts itself, justifies itself, and leads downwards.

The first-named is usually stoical, hard, tyrannical (Stoicism itself
was an example of the sort of "drag-chain" morality we speak of); the
other is gushing, sentimental, full of secrets, it has the women and
"beautiful feelings" on its side (Primitive Christianity was an example
of this morality).

I shall try to regard all moralising, with one glance, as a
phenomenon--also as a riddle. Moral phenomena have preoccupied me
like riddles. To-day I should be able to give a reply to the question:
why should my neighbour's welfare be of greater value to me than
my own? and why is it that my neighbour himself should value his
welfare differently from the way in which I value it--that is to say,
why should precisely my welfare be paramount in his mind? What is
the meaning of this "Thou shalt," which is regarded as "given" even by
philosophers themselves?

The seemingly insane idea that a man should esteem the act he performs
for a fellow-creature, higher than the one he performs for himself,
and that the same fellow-creature should do so too (that only those
acts should be held to be good which are performed with an eye to
the neighbour and for his welfare) has its reasons--namely, as the
result of the social instinct which rests upon the valuation, that
single individuals are of little importance although collectively
their importance is very great. This, of course, presupposes that they
constitute a community with one feeling and one conscience pervading
the whole. It is therefore a sort of exercise for keeping one's eyes in
a certain direction; it is the will to a kind of optics which renders a
view of one's self impossible.

My idea: goals are wanting, and these must be individuals. We see the
general drift: every individual gets sacrificed and serves as a tool.
Let any one keep his eyes open in the streets--is not every one he sees
a slave? Whither? What is the purpose of it all?

How is it possible that a man can respect himself only in regard
to moral values, that he subordinates and despises everything in
favour of good, evil, improvement, spiritual salvation, etc.? as,
for instance, Henri Fred. Amiel. What is the meaning of the moral
idiosyncrasy?--I mean this both in the psychological and physiological
sense, as it was, for instance, in Pascal. In cases, then, in which
other great qualities are not wanting; and even in the case of
Schopenhauer, who obviously valued what he did not and could not have
...--is it not the result of a merely mechanical moral interpretation
of real states of pain and displeasure? is it not a particular form
of sensibility which does not happen to understand the cause
of its many unpleasurable feelings, but thinks to explain them with
moral hypotheses? In this way an occasional feeling of well-being and
strength always appears under the optics of a "clean conscience,"
flooded with light through the proximity of God and the consciousness
of salvation.... Thus the moral idiosyncratist has (1) either
acquired his real worth in approximating to the virtuous type of
society: "the good fellow," "the upright man"--a sort of medium
state of high respectability: mediocre in all his abilities,
but honest, conscientious, firm, respected, and tried, in all his
aspirations; (2) or, he imagines he has acquired that worth, simply
because he cannot otherwise understand all his states--he is unknown to
himself; he therefore interprets himself in this fashion.--Morality is
the only scheme of interpretation by means of which this type of man
can tolerate himself:--is it a form of vanity?

The predominance of moral values.--The consequence of this
predominance: the corruption of psychology, etc.; the fatality which
is associated with it everywhere. What is the meaning of this
predominance? What does it point to?

To a certain greater urgency of saying nay or yea definitely in
this domain. All sorts of imperatives have been used in order to
make moral values appear as if they were for ever fixed:--they have
been enjoined for the longest period of time: they almost appear
to be instinctive, like inner commands. They are the expression of
society's preservative measures, for they are felt to be almost
beyond question. The practice--that is to say, the utility of being
agreed concerning superior values, has attained in this respect to
a sort of sanction. We observe that every care is taken to paralyse
reflection and criticism in this department--look at Kant's attitude!
not to speak of those who believe that it is immoral even to prosecute
"research" in these matters.

My desire is to show the absolute homogeneity of all phenomena, and
to ascribe to moral differentiations but the value of perspective; to
show that all that which is praised as moral is essentially the same
as that which is immoral, and was only made possible, according to
the law of all moral development--that is to say, by means of immoral
artifices and with a view to immoral ends--just as all that which
has been decried as immoral is, from the standpoint of economics,
both superior and essential; and how development leading to a greater
abundance of life necessarily Involves progress in the realm of
immorality. "Truth," that is the extent to which we allow ourselves
to comprehend this fact.

But do not let us fear: as a matter of fact, we require a great deal of
morality, in order to be immoral in this subtle way; let me speak in a
parable:--

A physiologist interested in a certain illness, and an invalid who
wishes to be cured of that same illness, have not the same interests.
Let us suppose that the illness happens to be morality,--for morality
is an illness,--and that we Europeans are the invalid: what an amount
of subtle torment and difficulty would arise supposing we Europeans
were, at once, our own inquisitive spectators and the physiologist
above-mentioned! Should we under these circumstances earnestly desire
to rid ourselves of morality? Should we want to? This is of course
irrespective of the question whether we should be able to do
so--whether we can be cured at all?

THE HERD.

Whose will to power is morality?--The common factor of all European
history since the time of Socrates is the attempt to make the moral
values dominate all other values, in order that they should not be
only the leader and judge of life, but also: (1) knowledge, (2) Art,
political and social aspirations. "Amelioration" regarded as the
only duty, everything else used as a means thereto (or as a force
distributing, hindering, and endangering its realisation, and therefore
to be opposed and annihilated ...).--A similar movement to be observed
in China and India.

What is the meaning of this will to power on the part of moral
values, which has played such a part in the world's prodigious
evolutions?

Answer:--Three powers lie concealed behind it; (1) The instinct
of the herd opposed to the strong and the independent; (2) the
instinct of all sufferers and all abortions opposed to the happy
and well-constituted; (3) the instinct of the mediocre opposed to
the exceptions.--Enormous advantage of this movement, despite the
cruelty, falseness, and narrow-mindedness which has helped it along
(for the history of the struggle of morality with the fundamental
instincts of life is in itself the greatest piece of immorality that
has ever yet been witnessed on earth ...).

The fewest succeed in discovering a problem behind all that which
constitutes our daily life, and to which we have become accustomed
throughout the ages--our eye does not seem focussed for such things:
at least, this seems to me to be the case in so far as our morality is
concerned.

"Every man should be the preoccupation of his fellows"; he who thinks
in this way deserves honour: no one ought to think of himself.

"Thou shalt": an impulse which, like the sexual impulse, cannot fathom
itself, is set apart and is not condemned as all the other instincts
are--on the contrary, it is made to be their standard and their judge!

The problem of "equality," in the face of the fact that we all thirst
for distinction: here, on the contrary, we should demand of ourselves
what we demand of others. That is so tasteless and obviously insane;
but--it is felt to be holy and of a higher order. The fact that it is
opposed to common sense is not even noticed.

Self-sacrifice and self-abnegation are considered distinguishing, as
are also the attempt to obey morality implicitly, and the belief that
one should be every one's equal in its presence.

The neglect and the surrender of Life and of well-being is held to be
distinguished, as are also the complete renunciation of individual
valuations and the severe exaction from every one of the same
sacrifice. "The value of an action is once and for all fixed: every
individual must submit to this valuation."

We see: an authority speaks--who speaks?--We must condone it in human
pride, if man tried to make this authority as high as possible, for
he wanted to feel as humble as he possibly could by the side of it.
Thus--God speaks!

God was necessary as an unconditional sanction which has no superior,
as a "Categorical Imperator": or, in so far as people believed in the
authority of reason, what was needed was a "unitarian metaphysics" by
means of which this view could be made logical.

Now, admitting that faith in God is dead: the question arises once
more: "who speaks?" My answer, which I take from biology and not from
metaphysics, is: "the gregarious instinct speaks." This is what
desires to be master: hence its "thou shalt!"--it will allow the
individual to exist only as a part of a whole, only in favour of the
whole, it hates those who detach themselves from everything--it turns
the hatred of all individuals against him.

The whole of the morality of Europe is based upon the values which
are useful to the herd: the sorrow of all higher and exceptional men
is explained by the fact that everything which distinguishes them from
others reaches their consciousness in the form of a feeling of their
own smallness and egregiousness. It is the virtues of modern men
which are the causes of pessimistic gloominess; the mediocre, like the
herd, are not troubled much with questions or with conscience--they
are cheerful. (Among the gloomy strong men, Pascal and Schopenhauer are
noted examples.)

The more dangerous a quality seems to the herd, the more completely it
is condemned.

The morality of truthfulness in the herd. "Thou shalt be
recognisable, thou shalt express thy inner nature by means of clear
and constant signs--otherwise thou art dangerous: and supposing
thou art evil, thy power of dissimulation is absolutely the worst
thing for the herd. We despise the secretive and those whom we
cannot identify.--Consequently thou must regard thyself as
recognisable, thou mayest not remain concealed from thyself, thou
mayest not even believe in the possibility of thy ever changing."
Thus, the insistence upon truthfulness has as its main object the
recognisability and the stability of the individual. As a matter
of fact, it is the object of education to make each gregarious
unit believe in a certain definite dogma concerning the nature
of man: education first creates this dogma and thereupon exacts
"truthfulness."

Within the confines of a herd or of a community--that is to say, inter
pares, the over-estimation of truthfulness is very reasonable. A
man must not allow himself to be deceived--and consequently he
adopts as his own personal morality that he should deceive no one!--a
sort of mutual obligation among equals! In his dealings with the
outside world caution and danger demand that he should be on his guard
against deception: the first psychological condition of this attitude
would mean that he is also on his guard against his own people.
Mistrust thus appears as the source of truthfulness.

A criticism of the virtues of the herd.--Inertia is active: (1)
In confidence, because mistrust makes suspense, reflection, and
observation necessary. (2) In veneration, where the gulf that
separates power is great and submission necessary: then, so that
fear may cease to exist, everybody tries to love and esteem, while
the difference in power is interpreted as a difference of value:
and thus the relationship to the powerful no longer has anything
revolting in it. (3) In the sense of truth. What is truth? Truth
is that explanation of things which causes us the smallest amount
of mental exertion (apart from this, lying is extremely fatiguing).
In sympathy. It is a relief to know one's self on the same level
with all, to feel as all feel, and to accept a belief which is
already current; it is something passive beside the activity which
appropriates and continually carries into practice the most individual
rights of valuation (the latter process allows of no repose). (5) In
impartiality and coolness of judgment: people scout the strain of being
moved, and prefer to be detached and "objective." (6) In uprightness:
people prefer to obey a law which is to hand rather than to create
a new one, rather than to command themselves and others: the fear of
commanding--it is better to submit than to rebel. (7) In toleration:
the fear of exercising a right or of enforcing a judgment.

The instinct of the herd values the juste milieu and the average
as the highest and most precious of all things: the spot where the
majority is to be found, and the air that it breathes there. In this
way it is the opponent of all order of rank; it regards a climb from
the level to the heights in the same light as a descent from the
majority to the minority. The herd regards the exception, whether
it be above or beneath its general level, as something which is
antagonistic and dangerous to itself. Their trick in dealing with
the exceptions above them, the strong, the mighty, the wise, and the
fruitful, is to persuade them to become guardians, herdsmen, and
watchmen--in fact, to become their head-servants: thus they convert
a danger into a thing which is useful. In the middle, fear ceases:
here a man is alone with nothing; here there is not much room even for
misunderstandings; here there is equality; here a man's individual
existence is not felt as a reproach, but as the right existence;
here contentment reigns supreme. Mistrust is active only towards the
exceptions; to be an exception is to be a sinner.

If, in compliance with our communal instincts, we make certain
regulations for, ourselves and forbid certain acts, we do not of
course, in common reason, forbid a certain kind of "existence," nor
a certain attitude of mind, but only a particular application and
development of this "existence" and "attitude of mind." But then the
idealist of virtue, the moralist, comes along and says: "God sees
into the human heart! What matters it that ye abstain from certain
acts: ye are not any better on that account!" Answer: Mr. Longears
and Virtue-Monger, we do not want to be better at all, we are quite
satisfied with ourselves, all we desire is that we should not harm
one another--and that is why we forbid certain actions when they take
a particular direction--that is to say, when they are against our
own interests: but that does not alter the fact that when these same
actions are directed against the enemies of our community--against
you, for instance--we are at a loss to know how to pay them sufficient
honour. We educate our children up to them; we develop them to the
fullest extent. Did we share that "god-fearing" radicalism which your
holy craziness recommends, if we were green-horns enough to condemn
the source of those forbidden "acts" by condemning the "heart" and the
"attitude of mind" which recommends them, that would mean condemning
our very existence, and with it its greatest prerequisite--an attitude
of mind, a heart, a passion which we revere with all our soul. By
our decrees we prevent this attitude of mind from breaking out and
venting itself in a useless way--we are prudent when we prescribe
such laws for ourselves; we are also moral in so doing.... Have
you no idea--however vague--what sacrifices it has cost us, how much
self-control, self-subjection, and hardness it has compelled us to
exercise? We are vehement in our desires; there are times when we even
feel as if we could devour each other.... But the "communal spirit" is
master of us: have you observed that this is almost a definition of
morality?

The weakness of the gregarious animal gives rise to a morality
which is precisely similar to that resulting from the weakness of the
decadent man: they understand each other; they associate with each
other (the great decadent religions always rely upon the support of
the herd). The gregarious animal, as such, is free from all morbid
characteristics, it is in itself an invaluable creature; but it is
incapable of taking any initiative; it must have a "leader"--the
priests understand this.... The state is not subtle, not secret
enough; the art of "directing consciences" slips its grasp. How is the
gregarious animal infected with illness by the priest?

The hatred directed against the privileged in body and spirit:
the revolt of the ugly and bungled souls against the beautiful, the
proud, and the cheerful. The weapons used: contempt of beauty, of
pride, of happiness: "There is no such thing as merit," "The danger is
enormous: it is right that one should tremble and feel ill at ease,"
"Naturalness is evil; it is right to oppose all that is natural--even
'reason'" (all that is antinatural is elevated to the highest place).

It is again the priests who exploit this condition, and who win the
"people" over to themselves. "The sinner" over whom there is more joy
in heaven than over "the just person." This is the struggle against
"paganism" (the pang of conscience, a measure for disturbing the
harmony of the soul).

The hatred of the mediocre for the exceptions, and of the herd for
its independent members. (Custom actually regarded as "morality.") The
revulsion of feeling against "egotism": that only is worth anything
which is done "for another." "We are all equal";--against the love of
dominion, against "dominion" in general;--against privilege;--against
sectarians, free-spirits, and sceptics;--against philosophy (a
force opposing mechanical and automatic instincts); in philosophers
themselves--"the categorical imperative," the essential nature of
morality, "general and universal."

The qualities and tendencies which are praised: peacefulness, equity,
moderation, modesty, reverence, respectfulness, bravery, chastity,
honesty, fidelity, credulity, rectitude, confidence, resignation,
pity, helpfulness, conscientiousness, simplicity, mildness, justice,
generosity, leniency, obedience, disinterestedness, freedom from envy,
good nature, industry.

We must ascertain to what extent such qualities are conditioned
as means to the attainment of certain desires and ends (often an
"evil" end); or as results of dominating passions (for instance,
intellectuality): or as the expressions of certain states of
need--that is to say, as preservative measures (as in the case of
citizens, slaves, women, etc.).

In short, every one of them is not considered "good" for its own
sake, but rather because it approximates to a standard prescribed
either by "society" or by the "herd," as a means to the ends of the
latter, as necessary for their preservation and enhancement, and also
as the result of an actual gregarious instinct in the individual;
these qualities are thus in the service of an instinct which is
fundamentally different from these states of virtue. For the herd
is antagonistic, selfish, and pitiless to the outside world; it is
full of a love of dominion and of feelings of mistrust, etc.

In the "herdsman" this antagonism comes to the fore he must have
qualities which are the reverse of those possessed by the herd.

The mortal enmity of the herd towards all order of rank: its
instinct is in favour of the leveller (Christ). Towards all strong
individuals (the sovereigns) it is hostile, unfair, intemperate,
arrogant, cheeky, disrespectful, cowardly, false, lying, pitiless,
deceitful, envious, revengeful.

My teaching is this, that the herd seeks to maintain and preserve one
type of man, and that it defends itself on two sides--that is to say,
against those which are decadents from its ranks (criminals, etc.), and
against those who rise superior to its dead level. The instincts of the
herd tend to a stationary state of society; they merely preserve. They
have no creative power.

The pleasant feelings of goodness and benevolence with which the just
man fills us (as opposed to the suspense and the fear to which the
great innovating man gives rise) are our own sensations of personal
security and equality: in this way the gregarious animal glorifies
the gregarious nature, and then begins to feel at ease. This judgment
on the part of the "comfortable" ones rigs itself out in the most
beautiful words--and thus "morality" is born. Let any one observe,
however, the hatred of the herd for all truthful men.

Let us not deceive ourselves! When a man hears the whisper of the moral
imperative in his breast, as altruism would have him hear it, he
shows thereby that he belongs to the herd. When a man is conscious
of the opposite feelings,--that is to say, when he sees his danger and
his undoing in disinterested and unselfish actions,--then he does not
belong to the herd.

My philosophy aims at a new order of rank: not at an individualistic
morality.[5] The spirit of the herd should rule within the herd--but
not beyond it: the leaders of the herd require a fundamentally
different valuation for their actions, as do also the independent ones
or the beasts of prey, etc.

[Footnote 5: TRANSLATOR'S NOTE--Here is a broad distinction between
Nietzsche and Herbert Spencer.]

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING MORALITY.

Morality regarded as an attempt at establishing human pride.--The
"Free-Will" theory is anti-religious. Its ultimate object is to bestow
the right upon man to regard himself as the cause of his highest
states and actions: it is a form of the growing feeling of pride.

Man feels his power his "happiness"; as they say: there must be a will
behind these states--otherwise they do not belong to him. Virtue is
an attempt at postulating a modicum of will, past or present, as the
necessary antecedent to every exalted and strong feeling of happiness:
if the will to certain actions is regularly present in consciousness,
a sensation of power may be interpreted as its result. This is a
merely psychological point of view, based upon the false assumption
that nothing belongs to us which we have not consciously willed. The
whole of the teaching of responsibility relies upon the ingenuous
psychological rule that the will is the only cause, and that one must
have been aware of having willed in order to be able to regard one's
self as a cause.

Then comes the counter-movement--that of the moral-philosophers.
These men still labour under the delusion that a man is responsible
only for what he has willed. The value of man is then made a moral
value: thus morality becomes a causa prima; for this there must be
some kind of principle in man, and "free will" is posited as prima
causa. The arriere pensee is always this: If man is not a causa
prima through his will, he must be irresponsible,--therefore he
does not come within the jurisdiction of morals,--virtue or vice is
automatic and mechanical....

In short: in order that man may respect himself he must be capable of
becoming evil.

Theatricalness regarded as the result of "Free Will" morality. It
is a step in the development of the feeling of power itself to
believe one's self to be the author of one's exalted moments (of one's
perfection) and to have willed them....

(Criticism: all perfect action is precisely unconscious and not
deliberate; consciousness is often the expression of an imperfect
and often morbid constitution. Personal perfection regarded as
determined by will, as an act of consciousness, as reason with
dialectics, is a caricature, a sort of self-contradiction.... Any
degree of consciousness renders perfection impossible. ... A form of
theatricalness.)

The moral hypothesis, designed with a view to justifying God,
said: evil must be voluntary (simply in order that the voluntariness
of goodness might be believed in); and again, all evil and suffering
have an object which is salvation.

The notion "guilt" was considered as something which had no
connection at all with the ultimate cause of existence, and the
notion "punishment" was held to be an educating and beneficent act,
consequently an act proceeding from a good God.

The absolute dominion of moral valuations over all others: nobody
doubted that God could not be evil and could do no harm--that is to
say, perfection was understood merely as moral perfection.

How false is the supposition that an action must depend upon what has
preceded it in consciousness! And morality has been measured in the
light of this supposition, as also criminality....

The value of an action must be judged by its results, say the
utilitarians: to measure it according to its origin involves the
impossibility of knowing that origin.

But do we know its results? Five stages ahead, perhaps. Who can tell
what an action provokes and sets in motion? As a stimulus? As the spark
which fires a powder-magazine? Utilitarians are simpletons.... And
finally, they would first of all have to know what is useful; here
also their sight can travel only over five stages or so.... They have
no notion of the great economy which cannot dispense with evil.

We do not know the origin or the results: has an action, then, any
value?

We have yet the action itself to consider: the states of consciousness
that accompany it, the yea or nay which follows upon its performance:
does the value of an action lie in the subjective states which
accompany it? (In that case, the value of music would be measured
according to the pleasure or displeasure which it occasions in us ...
which it gives to the composer. ...) Obviously feelings of value
must accompany it, a sensation of power, restraint, or impotence--for
instance, freedom or lightsomeness. Or, putting the question
differently: could the value of an action be reduced to physiological
terms? could it be the expression of completely free or constrained
life?--Maybe its biological value is expressed in this way....

If, then, an action can be judged neither in the light of its origin,
nor its results, nor its accompaniments in consciousness, then its
value must be x unknown....

It amounts to a denaturalisation of morality, to separate an action
from a man; to direct hatred or contempt against "sin"; to believe that
there are actions which are good or bad in themselves.

The re-establishment of "Nature": an action in itself is quite
devoid of value; the whole question is this: who performed it? One and
the same "crime" may, in one case, be the greatest privilege, in the
other infamy. As a matter of fact, it is the selfishness of the judges
which interprets an action (in regard to its author) according as to
whether it was useful or harmful to themselves (or in relation to its
degree of likeness or unlikeness to them).

The concept "reprehensible action" presents us with some difficulties.
Nothing in all that happens can be reprehensible in itself: one would
not dare to eliminate it completely; for everything is so bound up
with everything else, that to exclude one part would mean to exclude
the whole.

A reprehensible action, therefore, would mean a reprehensible world as
a whole....

And even then, in a reprehensible world even reprehending would be
reprehensible.... And the consequence of an attitude of mind that
condemns everything, would be the affirmation of everything in
practice.... If Becoming is a huge ring, everything that forms a part
of it is of equal value, is eternal and necessary.--In all correlations
of yea and nay, of preference and rejection, love and hate, all that
is expressed is a certain point of view, peculiar to the interests of
a certain type of living organism: everything that lives says yea by
the very fact of its existence.

Criticism of the subjective feelings of value.--Conscience. Formerly
people argued: conscience condemns this action, therefore this action
is reprehensible. But, as a matter of fact, conscience condemns an
action because that action has been condemned for a long period of
time: all conscience does is to imitate. It does not create values.
That which first led to the condemnation of certain actions, was
not conscience: but the knowledge of (or the prejudice against)
its consequences.... The approbation of conscience, the feeling of
well-being, of "inner peace," is of the same order of emotions as the
artist's joy over his work--it proves nothing.... Self-contentment
proves no more in favour of that which gives rise to it, than its
absence can prove anything against the value of the thing which fails
to give rise to it. We are far too ignorant to be able to judge of the
value of our actions: in this respect we lack the ability to regard
things objectively. Even when we condemn an action, we do not do so
as judges, but as adversaries.... When noble sentiments accompany an
action, they prove nothing in its favour: an artist may present us
with an absolutely insignificant thing, though he be in the throes of
the most exalted pathos during its production. It were wiser to regard
these sentiments as misleading: they actually beguile our eye and our
power, away from criticism, from caution and from suspicion, and the
result often is that we make fools of ourselves ... they actually
make fools of us.

We are heirs to the conscience-vivisection and self-crucifixion of two
thousand years: in these two practices lie perhaps our longest efforts
at becoming perfect, our mastery, and certainly our subtlety; we have
affiliated natural propensities with a heavy conscience.

An attempt to produce an entirely opposite state of affairs would be
possible: that is to say, to affiliate all desires of a beyond, all
sympathy with things which are opposed to the senses, the intellect,
and nature--in fact, all the ideals that have existed hitherto (which
were all anti-worldly), with a heavy conscience.

The great crimes in psychology:--

That all pain and unhappiness should have been falsified by
being associated with what is wrong (guilt). (Thus pain was robbed of
its innocence.)

That all strong emotions (wantonness, voluptuousness, triumph,
pride, audacity, knowledge, assurance, and happiness in itself) were
branded as sinful, as seductive, and as suspicious.

That feelings of weakness, inner acts of cowardice, lack of
personal courage, should have decked themselves in the most beautiful
words, and have been taught as desirable in the highest degree.

That greatness in man should have been given the meaning of
disinterestedness, self-sacrifice for another's good, for other people;
that even in the scientist and the artist, the elimination of the
individual personality is presented as the cause of the greatest
knowledge and ability.

That love should have been twisted round to mean submission
(and altruism), whereas it is in reality an act of appropriation or
of bestowal, resulting in the last case from a superabundance in the
wealth of a given personality. Only the wholest people can love; the
disinterested ones, the "objective" ones, are the worst lovers (just
ask the girls!). This principle also applies to the love of God or of
the "home country": a man must be able to rely absolutely upon himself.
(Egotism may be regarded as the pre-eminence of the ego, altruism as
the pre-eminence of others.)

Life regarded as a punishment (happiness as a means of seduction);
the passions regarded as devilish; confidence in one's self as godless.

The whole of psychology is a psychology of obstacles, a sort of
barricade built out of fear; on the one hand we find the masses (the
botched and bungled, the mediocre) defending themselves, by means of
it, against the strong (and finally destroying them in their growth
...); on the other hand, we find all the instincts with which these
classes are best able to prosper, sanctified and alone held in honour
by them. Let anyone examine the Jewish priesthood.

The vestiges of the depreciation of Nature through moral
transcendence: The value of disinterestedness, the cult of altruism;
the belief in a reward in the play of natural consequences; the belief
in "goodness" and in genius itself, as if the one, like the other,
were the result of disinterestedness; the continuation of the
Church's sanction of the life of the citizen; the absolutely deliberate
misunderstanding of history (as a means of educating up to morality)
or pessimism in the attitude taken up towards history (the latter
is just as much a result of the depreciation of Nature, as is that
pseudo-justification of history, that refusal to see history as the
pessimist sees it).

"Morality for its own sake"--this is an important step in the
denaturalisation of morals: in itself it appears as a final value. In
this phase religion has generally become saturated with it: as, for
instance, in the case of Judaism. It likewise goes through a phase in
which it separates itself from religion, and in which no God is
"moral" enough for it: it then prefers the impersonal ideal.... This is
how the case stands at present.

"Art for Art's sake": this is a similarly dangerous principle: by
this means a false contrast is lent to things--it culminates in the
slander of reality ("idealising" into the hateful). When an ideal
is severed from reality, the latter is debased, impoverished, and
calumniated. "Beauty for Beauty's sake," "Truth for Truth's sake,"
"Goodness for Goodness' sake"--these are three forms of the evil eye
for reality.

Art, knowledge, and morality are means: instead of recognising a
life-promoting tendency in them, they have been associated with the
opposite of Life--with "God"--they have also been regarded as
revelations of a higher world, which here and there transpires through
them....

"Beautiful" and "ugly," "true" and "false," "good" and
"evil"--these things are distinctions and antagonisms which
betray the preservative and promotive measures of Life, not necessarily
of man alone, but of all stable and enduring organisms which take up a
definite stand against their opponents. The war which thus ensues is
the essential factor: it is a means of separating things, leading to
stronger isolation....

Moral naturalism: The tracing back of apparently independent and
supernatural values to their real "nature"--that is to say, to
natural immorality, to natural "utility," etc.

Perhaps I may designate the tendency of these observations by the term
moral naturalism: my object is to re-translate the moral values which
have apparently become independent and unnatural into their real
nature--that is to say, into their natural "immorality."

N.B.--Refer to Jewish "holiness" and its natural basis. The case is
the same in regard to the moral law which has been made sovereign,
emancipated from its real feature (until it is almost the opposite
of Nature).

The stages in the denaturalisation of morality (or so-called
"Idealisation"):--

First it is a road to individual happiness,

then it is the result of knowledge,

then it is a Categorical Imperative,

then it is a way to Salvation,

then it is a denial of the will to live.

(The gradual progress of the hostility of morality to Life.)

The suppressed and effaced Heresy in morality.--Concepts: paganism,
master-morality, virtu.

My problem: What harm has mankind suffered hitherto from morals, as
also from its own morality? Intellectual harm, etc.

Why are not human values once more deposited nicely in the rut to
which they alone have a right--as routinary values? Many species
of animals have already become extinct; supposing man were also to
disappear, nothing would be lacking on earth. A man should be enough of
a philosopher to admire even this "nothing" (Nil admirari).

Man, a small species of very excitable animals,
which--fortunately--has its time. Life in general on earth is a
matter of a moment, an incident, an exception that has no consequence,
something which is of no importance whatever to the general character
of the earth; the earth itself is, like every star, a hiatus between
two nonentities, an event without a plan, without reason, will, or
self-consciousness--the worst kind of necessity--foolish necessity....
Something in us rebels against this view; the serpent vanity whispers
to our hearts, "All this must be false because it is revolting....
Could not all this be appearance? And man in spite of all, to use
Kant's words"----

HOW VIRTUE IS MADE TO DOMINATE.

Concerning the ideal of the moralist.--In this treatise we wish to
speak of the great politics of virtue. We wrote it for the use of
all those who are interested, not so much in the process of becoming
virtuous as in that of making others virtuous--in how virtue is made
to dominate. I even intend to prove that in order to desire this
one thing--the dominion of virtue--the other must be systematically
avoided; that is to say, one must renounce all hopes of becoming
virtuous. This sacrifice is great: but such an end is perhaps a
sufficient reward for such a sacrifice. And even greater sacrifices!...
And some of the most famous moralists have risked as much. For these,
indeed, had already recognised and anticipated the truth which is to
be revealed for the first time in this treatise: that the dominion of
virtue is absolutely attainable only by the use of the same means
which are employed in the attainment of any other dominion, in any case
not by means of virtue itself....

As I have already said, this treatise deals with the politics of
virtue: it postulates an ideal of these politics; it describes it as it
ought to be, if anything at all can be perfect on this earth. Now, no
philosopher can be in any doubt as to what the type of perfection is
in politics; it is, of course, Machiavellianism. But Machiavellianism
which is pur, sans melange, cru, vert, dans toute sa force, dans
toute son aprete, is superhuman, divine, transcendental, and can
never be achieved by man--the most he can do is to approximate it.
Even in this narrower kind of politics--in the politics of virtue--the
ideal never seems to have been realised. Plato, too, only bordered
upon it. Granted that one have eyes for concealed things, one can
discover, even in the most guileless and most conscious moralists
(and this is indeed the name of these moral politicians and of the
founders of all newer moral forces), traces showing that they too paid
their tribute to human weakness. They all aspired to virtue on their
own account--at least in their moments of weariness; and this is the
leading and most capital error on the part of any moralist--whose duty
it is to be an immoralist in deeds. That he must not exactly appear
to be the latter, is another matter. Or rather it is not another
matter: systematic self-denial of this kind (or, expressed morally:
dissimulation) belongs to, and is part and parcel of, the moralist's
canon and of his self-imposed duties: without it he can never attain
to his particular kind of perfection. Freedom from morality and from
truth when enjoyed for that purpose which rewards every sacrifice: for
the sake of making morality dominate--that is the canon. Moralists
are in need of the attitudes of virtue, as also of the attitudes of
truth; their error begins when they yield to virtue, when they lose
control of virtue, when they themselves become moral or true. A
great moralist is, among other things, necessarily a great actor; his
only danger is that his pose may unconsciously become a second nature,
just like his ideal, which is to keep his esse and his operari
apart in a divine way; everything he does must be done sub specie
boni--a lofty, remote, and exacting ideal! A divine ideal! And, as
a matter of fact, they say that the moralist thus imitates a model
which is no less than God Himself: God, the greatest Immoralist in
deeds that exists, but who nevertheless understands how to remain what
He is, the good God....

The dominion of virtue is not established by means of virtue itself;
with virtue itself, one renounces power, one loses the Will to Power.

The victory of a moral ideal is achieved by the same "immoral" means as
any other victory: violence, lies, slander, injustice.

He who knows the way fame originates will be suspicious even of the
fame virtue enjoys.

Morality is just as "immoral" as any other thing on earth; morality is
in itself a form of immorality.

The great relief which this conviction brings. The contradiction
between things disappears, the unity of all phenomena is saved----

There are some who actually go in search of what is immoral. When they
say: "this is wrong," they believe it ought to be done away with
or altered. On the other hand, I do not rest until I am quite clear
concerning the immorality of any particular thing which happens to
come under my notice. When I discover it, I recover my equanimity.

A. The ways which lead to power: the presentation of the new virtue
under the name of an old one,--the awakening of "interest" concerning
it ("happiness" declared to be its reward, and vice versa),--artistic
slandering of all that stands in its way,--the exploitation of
advantages and accidents with the view of glorifying it,--the
conversion of its adherents into fanatics by means of sacrifices and
separations,--symbolism on a grand scale.

B. Power attained: (1) Means of constraint of virtue; (2) seductive
means of virtue; (3) the (court) etiquette of virtue.

By what means does a virtue attain to power?--With precisely the
same means as a political party: slander, suspicion, the undermining of
opposing virtues that happen to be already in power, the changing of
their names, systematic persecution and scorn; in short, by means of
acts of general "immorality."

How does a desire behave towards itself in order to become a
virtue?--A process of rechristening; systematic denial of its
intentions; practice in misunderstanding itself; alliance with
established and recognised virtues; ostentatious enmity towards its
adversaries. If possible, too, the protection of sacred powers must be
purchased; people must also be intoxicated and fired with enthusiasm;
idealistic humbug must be used, and a party must be won, which either
triumphs or perishes--one must be unconscious and naif.

Cruelty has become transformed and elevated into tragic pity, so that
we no longer recognise it as such. The same has happened to the love
of the sexes which has become amour-passion; the slavish attitude of
mind appears as Christian obedience; wretchedness becomes humility;
the disease of the nervus sympathicus, for instance, is eulogised as
Pessimism, Pascalism, or Carlylism, etc.

We should begin to entertain doubts concerning a man if we heard that
he required reasons in order to remain respectable: we should, in any
case, certainly avoid his society. The little word "for" in certain
cases may be compromising; sometimes a single "for" is enough to
refute one. If we should hear, in course of time, that such-and-such
an aspirant for virtue was in need of bad reasons in order to remain
respectable, it would not conduce to increasing our respect for him.
But he goes further; he comes to us, and tells us quite openly: "You
disturb my morality, with your disbelief, Mr. Sceptic; so long as you
cannot believe in my bad reasons,--that is to say, in my God, in a
disciplinary Beyond, in free will, etc.,--you put obstacles in the way
of my virtue.... Moral, sceptics must be suppressed: they prevent the
moralisation of the masses."

Our most sacred convictions, those which are permanent in us concerning
the highest values, are judgments emanating from our muscles.

Morality in the valuation of races and classes.--In view of the fact
that the passions and fundamental instincts in every race and class
express the means which enable the latter to preserve themselves (or at
least the means which have enabled them to live for the longest period
of time), to call them "virtuous" practically means:

That they change their character, shed their skins, and blot out their
past.

It means that they should cease from differentiating themselves from
others.

It means that they are getting to resemble each other in their needs
and aspirations--or, more exactly, that they are declining....

It means that the will to one kind of morality is merely the tyranny
of the particular species, which is adapted to that kind of morality,
over other species: it means a process of annihilation or general
levelling in favour of the prevailing species (whether it be to
render the non-prevailing species harmless, or to exploit them); the
"Abolition of Slavery"--a so-called tribute to "human dignity"; in
truth, the annihilation of a fundamentally different species (the
undermining of its values and its happiness).

The qualities which constitute the strength of an opposing race or
class are declared to be the most evil and pernicious things it has:
for by means of them it may be harmful to us (its virtues are slandered
and rechristened).

When a man or a people harm us, their action constitutes an objection
against them: but from their point of view we are desirable, because we
are such as can be useful to them.

The insistence upon spreading "humaneness" (which guilelessly starts
out with the assumption that it is in possession of the formula "What
is human") is all humbug, beneath the cover of which a certain definite
type of man strives to attain to power: or, more precisely, a very
particular kind of instinct--the gregarious instinct. "The equality
of men": this is what lies concealed behind the tendency of making
ever more and more men alike as men.

The "interested nature" of the morality of ordinary people. (The
trick was to elevate the great passions for power and property to the
positions of protectors of virtue.)

To what extent do all kinds of business men and money-grabbers--all
those who give and take credit--find it necessary to promote the
levelling of all characters and notions of value? the commerce and the
exchange of the world leads to, and almost purchases, virtue.

The State exercises the same influence, as does also any sort of
ruling power at the head of officials and soldiers; science acts in
the same way, in order that it may work in security and economise its
forces. And the priesthood does the same.

Communal morality is thus promoted here, because it is advantageous;
and, in order to make it triumph, war and violence are waged against
immorality--with what "right"? Without any right whatsoever; but in
accordance with the instinct of self-preservation. The same classes
avail themselves of immorality when it serves their purpose to do so.

Observe the hypocritical colour which all civil institutions are
painted, just as if they were the offshoots of morality--for
instance: marriage, work, calling, patriotism, the family, order,
and rights. But as they were all established in favour of the most
mediocre type of man, to protect him from exceptions and the need of
exceptions, one must not be surprised to find them sown with lies.

Virtue must be defended against its preachers: they are its worst
enemies. For they teach virtue as an ideal for all; they divest
virtue of the charm which consists in its rareness, its inimitableness,
its exceptional and non-average character--that is to say, of its
aristocratic charm. A stand must also be made against those
embittered idealists who eagerly tap all pots and are satisfied to
hear them ring hollow: what ingenuousness--to demand great and rare
things, and then to declare, with anger and contempt of one's fellows,
that they do not exist!--It is obvious, for instance, that a marriage
is worth only as much as those are worth whom it joins--that is to say,
that on the whole it is something wretched and indecent: no priest or
registrar can make anything else of it.

Virtue[6] has all the instincts of the average man against it: it is
not profitable, it is not prudent, and it isolates. It is related to
passion, and not very accessible to reason; it spoils the character,
the head, and the senses--always, of course, subject to the medium
standard of men; it provokes hostility towards order, and towards the
lies which are concealed beneath all order, all institutions, and
all reality--when seen in the light of its pernicious influence upon
others, it is the worst of vices.

I recognise virtue in that: (1) it does not insist upon being
recognised; (2) it does not presuppose the existence of virtue
everywhere, but precisely something else; (3) it does not suffer
from the absence of virtue, but regards it rather as a relation of
perspective which throws virtue into relief: it does not proclaim
itself; (4) it makes no propaganda; (5) it allows no one to pose as
judge because it is always a personal virtue; (6) it does precisely
what is generally forbidden: virtue as I understand it is the actual
vetitum within all gregarious legislation; (7) in short, I recognise
virtue in that it is in the Renaissance style--virtu--free from all
moralic acid....

[Footnote 6: TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.--Virtue is used here, of course, in the
sense of "the excellence of man," not in the sense of the Christian
negative virtue.]

In the first place[7] Messrs. Virtue-mongers, you have no superiority
over us; we should like to make you take modesty a little more to
heart: it is wretched personal interests and prudence which suggest
your virtue to you. And if you had more strength and courage in your
bodies you would not lower yourselves thus to the level of virtuous
nonentities. You make what you can of yourselves: partly what you are
obliged to make,--that is to say, what your circumstances force you
to make,--partly what suits your pleasure and seems useful to you.
But if you do only what is in keeping with your inclinations, or
what necessity exacts from you, or what is useful to you, you ought
neither to praise yourselves nor let others praise you!... One is
a thoroughly puny kind of man when one is only virtuous: nothing
should mislead you in this regard! Men who have to be considered at
all, were never such donkeys of virtue: their inmost instinct, that
which determined their quantum of power, did not find its reckoning
thus: whereas with your minimum amount of power nothing can seem more
full of wisdom to you than virtue. But the multitude are on your
side: and because you tyrannise over us, we shall fight you....

[Footnote 7: TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.--Here Nietzsche returns to Christian
virtue which is negative and moral.]

A virtuous man is of a lower species because, in the first place,
he has no "personality," but acquires his value by conforming with a
certain human scheme which has been once and for ever fixed. He has no
independent value: he may be compared; he has his equals, he must not
be an individual.

Reckoning up the qualities of the good man, why is it they appear
pleasant to us? Because they urge us neither to war, to mistrust, to
caution, to the accumulating of forces, nor to severity: our laziness,
our good nature, and our levity, have a good time. This, our feeling
of well-being, is what we project into the good man in the form of a
quality, in the form of a valuable possession.

Under certain circumstances, virtue is merely a venerable form of
stupidity: who could blame you for it? And this form of virtue has not
been outlived even to-day. A sort of honest peasant-simplicity, which
is possible, however, in all classes of society, and which one cannot
meet with anything else than a respectful smile, still thinks to-day
that everything is in good hands--that is to say, in "God's hands": and
when it supports this proposition with that same modest assurance as
that with which it would assert that two and two are four, we others
naturally refrain from contradiction.

Why disturb this pure foolery? Why darken it with our cares
concerning man, people, goals, the future? Even if we wished to
do so, we shouldn't succeed. In all things these people see the
reflection of their own venerable stupidity and goodness (in them the
old God--deus myops-- still lives); we others see something else in
everything: our problematic nature, our contradictions, our deeper,
more painful, and more suspicious wisdom.

He who finds a particular virtue an easy matter, ultimately laughs at
it. Seriousness cannot be maintained once virtue is attained. As soon
as a man has reached virtue, he jumps out of it--whither? Into devilry.

Meanwhile, how intelligent all our evil tendencies and impulses have
become! What an amount of inquisitiveness torments them! They are all
fishhooks of knowledge!

The idea is to associate vice with something so terrible that at
last one is obliged to run away from it in order to be rid of its
associations. This is the well-known case of Tannhauser. Tannhauser,
brought to his wits' end by Wagnerian music, cannot endure life any
longer even in the company of Mrs. Venus: suddenly virtue begins to
have a charm for him; a Thuringian virgin goes up in price, and what
is even worse still, he shows a liking for Wolfram von Eschenbach's
melody....

The Patrons of Virtue.--Lust of property, lust of power, laziness,
simplicity, fear; all these things are interested in virtue; that is
why it stands so securely.

Virtue is no longer believed in; its powers of attraction are dead;
what is needed is some one who will once more bring it into the market
in the form of an outlandish kind of adventure and of dissipation. It
exacts too much extravagance and narrow-mindedness from its believers
to allow of conscience not being against it to-day. Certainly, for
people, without either consciences or scruples, this may constitute
its new charm: it is now what it has never been before--a vice.

Virtue is still the most expensive vice: let it remain so!

Virtues are as dangerous as vices, in so far as they are allowed to
rule over one as authorities and laws coming from outside, and not as
qualities one develops one's self. The latter is the only right way;
they should be the most personal means of defence and most individual
needs--the determining factors of precisely our existence and growth,
which we recognise and acknowledge independently of the question
whether others grow with us with the help of the same or of different
principles. This view of the danger of the virtue which is understood
as impersonal and objective also holds good of modesty: through
modesty many of the choicest intellects perish. The morality of modesty
is the worst possible softening influence for those souls for which it
is pre-eminently necessary that they become hard betimes.

The domain of morality must be reduced and limited step by step; the
names of the instincts which are really active in this sphere must be
drawn into the light of day and honoured, after they have lain all
this time in the concealment of hypocritical names of virtue. Out of
respect for one's "honesty," which makes itself heard ever more and
more imperiously, one ought to unlearn the shame which makes one deny
and "explain away" all natural instincts. The extent to which one can
dispense with virtue is the measure of one's strength; and a height may
be imagined where the notion "virtue" is understood in such a way as
to be reminiscent of virtu--the virtue of the Renaissance--free from
moralic acid. But for the moment--how remote this ideal seems!

The reduction of the domain of morality is a sign of its progress.
Wherever, hitherto, thought has not been guided by causality, thinking
has taken a moral turn.

After all, what have I achieved? Let us not close our eyes to this
wonderful result: I have lent new charms to virtue--it now affects
one in the same way as something forbidden. It has our most subtle
honesty against it, it is salted in the "cum grano salis" of the
scientific pang of conscience. It savours of antiquity and of old
fashion, and thus it is at last beginning to draw refined people and
to make them inquisitive--in short, it affects us like a vice. Only
after we have once recognised that everything consists of lies and
appearance, shall we have again earned the right to uphold this most
beautiful of all fictions--virtue. There will then remain no further
reason to deprive ourselves of it: only when we have shown virtue to
be a form of immorality do we again justify it,--it then becomes
classified, and likened, in its fundamental features, to the profound
and general immorality of all existence, of which it is then shown to
be a part. It appears as a form of luxury of the first order, the most
arrogant, the dearest, and rarest form of vice. We have robbed it of
its grimaces and divested it of its drapery; we have delivered it from
the importunate familiarity of the crowd; we have deprived it of its
ridiculous rigidity, its empty expression, its stiff false hair, and
its hieratic muscles.

And is it supposed that I have thereby done any harm to virtue?... Just
as little as anarchists do to princes. Only since they have been shot
at, have they once more sat securely on their thrones.... For thus
it has always been and will ever be: one cannot do a thing a better
service than to persecute it and to run it to earth.... This--I have
done.

THE MORAL IDEAL.

A. A Criticism of Ideals.

It were the thing to begin this criticism in suchwise as to do away
with the word "Ideal": a criticism of desiderata.

Only the fewest amongst us are aware of what is involved, from the
standpoint of desirability, in every "thus should it be, but it
is not," or even "thus it ought to have been": such expressions of
opinion involve a condemnation of the whole course of events. For
there is nothing quite isolated in the world: the smallest thing bears
the largest on its back; on thy small injustice the whole nature of
the future depends; the whole is condemned by every criticism which
is directed at the smallest part of it. Now granting that the moral
norm--even as Kant understood it--is never completely fulfilled, and
remains like a sort of Beyond hanging over reality without ever falling
down to it; then morality would contain in itself a judgment concerning
the whole, which would still, however, allow of the question: whence
does it get the right thereto? How does the part come to acquire this
judicial position relative to the whole? And if, as some have declared,
this moral condemnation of, and dissatisfaction with, reality, is
an ineradicable instinct, is it not possible that this instinct may
perhaps belong to the ineradicable stupidities and immodesties of our
species?--But in saying this, we are doing precisely what we deprecate;
the point of view of desirability and of unauthorised fault-finding
is part and parcel of the whole character of worldly phenomena just
as every injustice and imperfection is--it is our very notion of
"perfection" which is never gratified. Every instinct which desires
to be indulged gives expression to its dissatisfaction with the
present state of things: how? Is the whole perhaps made up of a host
of dissatisfied parts, which all have desiderata in their heads? Is
the "course of things" perhaps "the road hence? the road leading away
from reality "--that is to say, eternal dissatisfaction in itself? Is
the conception of desiderata perhaps the essential motive-power of all
things? Is it--deus?

It seems to me of the utmost importance that we should rid ourselves
of the notion of the whole, of an entity, and of any kind of power
or form of the unconditioned. For we shall never be able to resist the
temptation of regarding it as the supreme being, and of christening
it "God." The "All" must be subdivided; we must unlearn our respect
for it, and reappropriate that which we have lent the unknown and an
imaginary entity, for the purposes of our neighbour and ourselves.
Whereas, for instance, Kant said: "Two things remain for ever worthy
of honour" (at the close of his Practical Reason)--to-day we should
prefer to say: "Digestion is more worthy of honour." The concept,
"the All," will always give rise to the old problems, "How is evil
possible?" etc. Therefore, there is no "All", there is no great
sensorium or inventarium or power-magazine.

A man as he ought to be: this sounds to me in just as bad taste as:
"A tree as it ought to be."

Ethics: or the "philosophy of desirability."--"Things ought to be
otherwise," "things ought to become different": dissatisfaction
would thus seem the heart of ethics.

One could find a way out of it, first, by selecting only those states
in which one is free from emotion; secondly, by grasping the insolence
and stupidity of the attitude of mind: for to desire that something
should be otherwise than it is, means to desire that everything
should be different--it involves a damaging criticism of the whole.
But life itself consists in such desiring!

To ascertain what exists, how it exists seems an ever so much higher
and more serious matter than every "thus should it be," because the
latter, as a piece of human criticism and arrogance, appears to be
condemned as ludicrous from the start. It expresses a need which would
fain have the organisation of the world correspond with our human
well-being, and which directs the will as much as possible towards the
accomplishment of that relationship.

On the other hand, this desire, "thus it ought to be," has only called
forth that other desire, "what exists?" The desire of knowing what
exists, is already a consequence of the question, "how? is it possible?
Why precisely so?" Our wonder at the disagreement between our desires
and the course of the world has led to our learning to know the
course of the world. Perhaps the matter stands differently: maybe the
expression, "thus it ought to be," is merely the utterance of our
desire to overcome the world----

To-day when every attempt at determining how man should be--is
received with some irony, when we adhere to the notion that in spite
of all one only becomes what one is(in spite of all--that is to
say, education, instruction, environment, accident, and disaster),
in the matter of morality we have learnt, in a very peculiar way,
how to reverse the relation of cause and effect. Nothing perhaps
distinguishes us more than this from the ancient believers in morality.
We no longer say, for instance, "Vice is the cause of a man's
physical ruin," and we no longer say, "A man prospers with virtue
because it brings a long life and happiness." Our minds to-day are
much more inclined to the belief that vice and virtue are not causes
but only effects. A man becomes a respectable member of society
because he was a respectable man from the start--that is to say,
because he was born in possession of good instincts and prosperous
propensities.... Should a man enter the world poor, and the son of
parents who are neither economical nor thrifty, he is insusceptible
of being improved--that is to say, he is only fit for the prison or
the madhouse.... To-day we are no longer able to separate moral from
physical degeneration: the former is merely a complicated symptom of
the latter; a man is necessarily bad just as he is necessarily ill....
Bad: this word here stands for a certain lack of capacity which is
related physiologically with the degenerating type--for instance, a
weak will, an uncertain and many-sided personality, the inability to
resist reacting to a stimulus and to control one's self, and a certain
constraint resulting from every suggestion proceeding from another's
will. Vice is not a cause; it is an effect. ... Vice is a somewhat
arbitrary-epitome of certain effects resulting from physiological
degeneracy. A general proposition such as that which Christianity
teaches, namely, "Man is evil," would be justified provided one were
justified in regarding a given type of degenerate man as normal. But
this may be an exaggeration. Of course, wherever Christianity prospers
and prevails, the proposition holds good: for then the existence of an
unhealthy soil--of a degenerate territory--is demonstrated.

It is difficult to have sufficient respect for man, when one sees how
he understands the art of fighting his way, of enduring, of turning
circumstances to his own advantage, and of overthrowing opponents;
but when he is seen in the light of his desires, he is the most
absurd of all animals. It is just as if he required a playground
for his cowardice, his laziness, his feebleness, his sweetness, his
submissiveness, where he recovers from his strong virile virtues. Just
look at man's "desiderata" and his "ideals." Man, when he desires,
tries to recover from that which is eternally valuable in him, from
his deeds; and then he rushes into nonentity, absurdity, valuelessness,
childishness. The intellectual indigence and lack of inventive power of
this resourceful and inventive animal is simply terrible. The "ideal"
is at the same time the penalty man pays for the enormous expenditure
which he has to defray in all real and pressing duties.--Should reality
cease to prevail, there follow dreams, fatigue, weakness: an "ideal"
might even be regarded as a form of dream, fatigue, or weakness. The
strongest and the most impotent men become alike when this condition
overtakes them: they deify the cessation of work, of war, of
passions, of suspense, of contrasts, of "reality "--in short, of the
struggle for knowledge and of the trouble of acquiring it.

"Innocence" to them is idealised stultification; "blessedness" is
idealised idleness; "love," the ideal state of the gregarious animal
that will no longer have an enemy. And thus everything that lowers and
belittles man is elevated to an ideal.

A desire magnifies the thing desired; and by not being realised it
grows--the greatest ideas are those which have been created by the
strongest and longest desiring. Things grow ever more valuable in our
estimation, the more our desire for them increases: if "moral values"
have become the highest values, it simply shows that the moral ideal
is the one which has been realised least (and thus it represented
the Beyond to all suffering, as a road to blessedness). Man,
with ever-increasing ardour, has only been embracing clouds: and
ultimately called his desperation and impotence "God."

Think of the naivete of all ultimate "desiderata"--when the
"wherefore" of man remains unknown.

What is the counterfeit coinage of morality? First of all we should
know what "good and evil" mean. That is as good as wishing to know why
man is here, and what his goal or his destiny is. And that means that
one would fain know that man actually has a goal or a destiny.

The very obscure and arbitrary notion that humanity has a general
duty to perform, and that, as a whole, it is striving towards a
goal, is still in its infancy. Perhaps we shall once more be rid
of it before it becomes a "fixed idea." ... But humanity does not
constitute a whole: it is an indissoluble multiplicity of ascending
and descending organisms--it knows no such thing as a state of youth
followed by maturity and then age. But its strata lie confused and
superimposed--and in a few thousand years there may be even younger
types of men than we can point out to-day. Decadence, on the other
hand, belongs to all periods of human history: everywhere there is
refuse and decaying matter, such things are in themselves vital
processes; for withering and decaying elements must be eliminated.

Under the empire of Christian prejudice this question was never put
at all: the purpose of life seemed to lie in the salvation of the
individual soul; the question whether humanity might last for a long or
a short time was not considered. The best Christians longed for the end
to come as soon as possible;--concerning the needs of the individual,
there seemed to be no doubt whatsoever. ... The duty of every
individual for the present was identical with what it would be in any
sort of future for the man of the future: the value, the purpose, the
limit of values was for ever fixed, unconditioned, eternal, one with
God.... What deviated from this eternal type was impious, diabolic,
criminal.

The centre of gravity of all values for each soul lay in that soul
itself: salvation or damnation! The salvation of the immortal soul!
The most extreme form of personalisation.... For each soul there
was only one kind of perfection; only one ideal, only one road to
salvation.... The most extreme form of the principle of equal rights,
associated with an optical magnification of individual importance to
the point of megalomania.... Nothing but insanely important souls,
revolving round their own axes with unspeakable terror....

Nobody believes in these assumed airs of importance any longer
to-day: and we have sifted our wisdom through the sieve of contempt.
Nevertheless the optical habit survives, which would fain measure the
value of man by his proximity to a certain ideal maw. at bottom the
personalisation view is upheld as firmly as that of the equality of
rights as regards the ideal. In short: people seem to think that they
know what the ultimate desideratum is in regard to the ideal man....

But this belief is merely the result of the exceedingly detrimental
influence of the Christian ideal, as anybody can discover for himself
every time he carefully examines the "ideal type." In the first place,
it is believed that the approach to a given "type" is desirable;
secondly, that this particular type is known; thirdly, that every
deviation from this type is a retrograde movement, a stemming of the
spirit of progress, a loss of power and might in man.... To dream of a
state of affairs in which this perfect man will be in the majority:
our friends the Socialists and even Messrs. the Utilitarians have not
reached a higher level than this. In this way an aim seems to have
crept into the evolution of man: at any rate the belief in a certain
progress towards an ideal is the only shape in which an aim is
conceived in the history of mankind to-day. In short: the coming of the
"Kingdom of God" has been placed in the future, and has been given an
earthly, a human meaning--but on the whole the faith in the old ideal
is still maintained....

The more concealed forms of the cult of Christian, moral ideals.--The
insipid and cowardly notion "Nature" invented by Nature-enthusiasts
(without any knowledge whatsoever of the terrible, the implacable,
and the cynical element in even "the most beautiful" aspects), is
only a sort of attempt at reading the moral and Christian notion of
"humanity" into Nature;--Rousseau's concept of Nature, for instance,
which took for granted that "Nature" meant freedom, goodness,
innocence, equity, justice, and Idylls, was nothing more at bottom
than the cult of Christian morality. We should collect passages from
the poets in order to see what they admired, in lofty mountains, for
instance. What Goethe had to do with them--why he admired Spinoza.
Absolute ignorance concerning the reasons of this cult....

The insipid and cowardly concept "Man" a la Comte and Stuart
Mill, is at times the subject of a cult.... This is only the
Christian moral ideal again under another name.... Refer also to the
freethinkers--Guyau for example.

The insipid and cowardly concept "Art" which is held to mean sympathy
with all suffering and with everything botched and bungled (the same
thing happens to history, cf. Thierry): again it is the cult of the
Christian moral ideal.

And now, as to the whole socialistic ideal: it is nothing but a
blockheaded misunderstanding of the Christian moral ideal.

The origin of the ideal. The examination of the soil out of which it
grows.

A. Starting out from those "aesthetic" mental states during which the
world seems rounder, fuller, and more perfect: we have the pagan
ideal with its dominating spirit of self-affirmation (people give of
their abundance). The highest type: the classical ideal--regarded
as an expression of the successful nature of all the more important
instincts. In this classical ideal we find the grand style as the
highest style. An expression of the "will to power" itself. The
instinct which is most feared dares to acknowledge itself.

B. Starting out from the mental states in which the world seemed
emptier, paler, and thinner, when "spiritualisation" and the absence
of sensuality assume the rank of perfection, and when all that is
brutal, animal, direct, and proximate is avoided (people calculate
and select): the "sage," "the angel"; priestliness = virginity =
ignorance, are the physiological ideals of such idealists: the anaemic
ideal. Under certain circumstances this anaemic ideal may be the ideal
of such natures as represent paganism (thus Goethe sees his "saint"
in Spinoza).

C. Starting out from those mental states in which the world seemed
more absurd, more evil, poorer, and more deceptive, an ideal cannot
even be imagined or desired in it (people deny and annihilate);
the projection of the ideal into the sphere of the anti-natural,
anti-actual, anti-logical; the state of him who judges thus (the
"impoverishment" of the world as a result of suffering: people take,
they no longer bestow): the anti-natural ideal.

(The Christian ideal is a transitional form between the second
and the third, now inclining more towards the former type, and anon
inclining towards the latter.)

The three ideals: A. Either a strengthening of Life (paganism,)
or B. an impoverishment of Life (anaemia), or C. a denial of
Life (anti-naturalism). The state of beatitude in A. is the feeling
of extreme abundance; in B. it is reached by the most fastidious
selectiveness; in C. it is the contempt and the destruction of Life.

A. The consistent type understands that even evil must not be
hated, must not be resisted, and that it is not allowable to make war
against one's self; that it does not suffice merely to accept the pain
which such behaviour brings in its train; that one lives entirely in
positive feelings; that one takes the side of one's opponents in word
and deed; that by means of a superfoetation of peaceful, kindly,
conciliatory, helpful, and loving states, one impoverishes the soil of
the other states, ... that one is in need of unremitting practice.
What is achieved thereby?--The Buddhistic type, or the perfect cow.

This point of view is possible only where no moral fanaticism
prevails--that is to say, when evil is not hated on its own account,
but because it opens the road to conditions which are painful (unrest,
work, care, complications, dependence).

This is the Buddhistic point of view: there is no hatred of sin, the
concept "sin," in fact, is entirely lacking.

B. The inconsistent type. War is waged against evil--there is a
belief that war waged for Goodness' sake does not involve the same
moral results or affect character in the same way as war generally
does (and owing to which tendencies it is detested as evil). As a
matter of fact, a war of this sort carried on against evil is much
more profoundly pernicious than any sort of personal hostility; and
generally, it is "the person" which reassumes, at least in fancy, the
position of opponent (the devil, evil spirits, etc.). The attitude of
hostile observation and spying in regard to everything which may be
bad in us, or hail from a bad source, culminates in a most tormented
and most anxious state of mind: thus "miracles," rewards, ecstasy, and
transcendental solutions of the earth-riddle now became desirable.
... The Christian type: or the perfect bigot.

C. The stoical type. Firmness, self-control, imperturbability,
peace in the form of the rigidity of a will long active--profound
quiet, the defensive state, the fortress, the mistrust of war--firmness
of principles; the unity of knowledge and will; great self-respect.
The type of the anchorite. The perfect blockhead.

An ideal which is striving to prevail or to assert itself endeavours
to further its purpose (a) by laying claim to a spurious origin;
by assuming a relationship between itself and the powerful ideals
already existing; (c) by means of the thrill produced by mystery,
as though an unquestionable power were manifesting itself; (d) by
the slander of its opponents' ideals; (e) by a lying teaching of
the advantages which follow in its wake, for instance: happiness,
spiritual peace, general peace, or even the assistance of a mighty
God, etc.--Contributions to the psychology of the idealists: Carlyle,
Schiller, Michelet.

Supposing all the means of defence and protection, by means of which an
ideal survives, are discovered, is it thereby refuted? It has merely
availed itself of the means of which everything lives and grows--they
are all "immoral."

My view: all the forces and instincts which are the source of life
are lying beneath the ban of morality: morality is the life-denying
instinct. Morality must be annihilated if life is to be emancipated.

To avoid knowing himself is the prudence of the idealist. The
idealist: a creature who has reasons for remaining in the dark
concerning himself, and who is also clever enough to remain in the dark
concerning these reasons also.

The tendency of moral evolution.--Every one's desire is that there
should be no other teaching and valuation of things than those by means
of which he himself succeeds. Thus the fundamental tendency of the
weak and mediocre of all times, has been to enfeeble the strong
and to reduce them to the level of the weak: their chief weapon in this
process was the moral principle. The attitude of the strong towards
the weak is branded as evil; the highest states of the strong become
bad bywords.

The struggle of the many against the strong, of the ordinary against
the extraordinary, of the weak against the strong: meets with one
of its finest interruptions in the fact that the rare, the refined,
the more exacting, present themselves as the weak, and repudiate the
coarser weapons of power.

The so-called pure instinct for knowledge of all philosophers
is dictated to them by their moral "truths," and is only seemingly
independent.

The "Moral Truths," "thus shall things be done," are mere states
of consciousness of an instinct which has grown tired, "thus and thus
are things done by us." The "ideal" is supposed to re-establish and
strengthen an instinct; it flatters man to feel he can obey when he is
only an automaton.

Morality as a means of seduction.--"Nature is good; for a wise
and good God is its cause. Who, therefore, is responsible for the
'corruption of man'? Tyrants and seducers and the ruling classes are
responsible--they must be wiped out": this is Rousseau's logic (compare
with Pascals logic, which concludes by an appeal to original sin).

Refer also to Luther's logic, which is similar. In both cases a
pretext is sought for the introduction of an insatiable lust of revenge
as a moral and religious duty. The hatred directed against the ruling
classes tries to sanctify itself ... (the "sinfulness of Israel" is
the basis of the priest's powerful position).

Compare this with Pauls logic, which is similar. It is always under
the cover of God's business that these reactions appear, under the
cover of what is right, or of humanity, etc. In the case of Christ
the rejoicings of the people appear as the cause of His crucifixion.
It was an anti-priestly movement from the beginning. Even in the
anti-Semitic movement we find the same trick: the opponent is overcome
with moral condemnations, and those who attack him pose as retributive
Justice.

The incidents of the fight: the fighter tries to transform his
opponent into the exact opposite of himself--imaginatively, of
course. He tries to believe in himself to such an extent that he may
have the courage necessary for the "good Cause" (as if he were the
good Cause); as if reason, taste, and virtue were being assailed
by his opponents.... The belief of which he is most in need, as the
strongest means of defence and attack, is the belief in himself,
which, however, knows how to misinterpret itself as a belief in
God. He never pictures the advantages and the uses of victory, but
only understands victory for the sake of victory--for God's sake.
Every small community (or individual), finding itself involved in
a struggle, strives to convince itself of this: "Good taste, good
judgment, and virtue are ours." War urges people to this exaggerated
self-esteem....

Whatever kind of eccentric ideal one may have (whether as
a "Christian," a "free-spirit," an "immoralist," or a German
Imperialist), one should try to avoid insisting upon its being the
ideal; for, by so doing, it is deprived of all its privileged nature.
One should have an ideal as a distinction; one should not propagate it,
and thus level one's self down to the rest of mankind.

How is it, that in spite of this obvious fact, the majority of
idealists indulge in propaganda for their ideal, just as if they had
no right to it unless the majority acquiesce therein?--For instance,
all those plucky and insignificant girls behave in this way, who claim
the right to study Latin and mathematics. What is it urges them to do
this? I fear it is the instinct of the herd, and the terror of the
herd: they fight for the "emancipation of woman," because they are best
able to achieve their own private little distinction by fighting for it
under the cover of a charitable movement, under the banner bearing
the device "For others."

The cleverness of idealists consists in their persistently posing
as the missionaries and "representatives" of an ideal: they thus
"beautify" themselves in the eyes of those who still believe in
disinterestedness and heroism. Whereas real heroism consists, not
in fighting under the banner of self-sacrifice, submission, and
disinterestedness, but in not fighting at all.... "I am thus; I will
be thus--and you can go to the devil!"

Every ideal assumes love, hate, reverence, and contempt. Either
positive feeling is the primum mobile, or negative feeling is.
Hatred and contempt are the primum mobile in all the ideals which
proceed from resentment.

B. A Criticism of the "Good Man" of the Saint, etc.

The "good man" Or, hemiplegia of virtue.--In the opinion of every
strong and natural man, love and hate, gratitude and revenge, goodness
and anger, affirmative and negative action, belong to each other. A
man is good on condition that he knows how to be evil; a man is evil,
because otherwise he would not know how to be good. Whence comes
the morbidness and ideological unnaturalness which repudiates these
compounds--which teaches a sort of one-sided efficiency as the highest
of all things? Whence this hemiplegia of virtue, the invention of the
good man? The object seems to be to make man amputate those instincts
which enable him to be an enemy, to be harmful, to be angry, and to
insist upon revenge.... This unnaturalness, then, corresponds to that
dualistic concept of a wholly good and of a wholly bad creature (God,
Spirit, Man); in the first are found all the positive, in the second
all the negative forces, intentions, and states. This method of valuing
thus believes itself to be "idealistic"; it never doubts that in its
concept of the "good man," it has found the highest desideratum. When
aspiring to its zenith it fancies a state in which all evil is wiped
out, and in which only good creatures have actually remained over.
It does not therefore regard the mutual dependence of the opposites
good and evil as proved. On the contrary, the latter ought to vanish,
and the former should remain. The first has a right to exist, the
second ought not to be with us at all.... What, as a matter of fact,
is the reason of this desire? In all ages, and particularly in the
Christian age, much labour has been spent in trying to reduce men
to this one-sided activity: and even to-day, among those who have
been deformed and weakened by the Church, people are not lacking who
desire precisely the same thing with their "humanisation" generally,
or with their "Will of God," or with their "Salvation of the Soul."
The principal injunction behind all these things is, that man should
no longer do anything evil, that he should under no circumstances be
harmful or desire harm. The way to arrive at this state of affairs is
to amputate all hostile tendencies, to suppress all the instincts of
resentment, and to establish "spiritual peace" as a chronic disease.

This attitude of mind, in which a certain type of man is bred,
starts out with this absurd hypothesis: good and evil are postulated
as realities which are in a state of mutual contradiction (not as
complementary values, which they are), people are advised to take the
side of the good, and it is insisted upon that a good man resists
and forswears evil until every trace of it is uprooted--but with
this valuation Life is actually denied, for in all its instincts
Life has both yea and nay. But far from understanding these facts,
this valuation dreams rather of returning to the wholeness, oneness,
and strengthfulness of Life: it actually believes that a state of
blessedness will be reached when the inner anarchy and state of unrest
which result from these opposed impulses is brought to an end.--It is
possible that no more dangerous ideology, no greater mischief in the
science of psychology, has ever yet existed, as this will to good: the
most repugnant type of man has been reared, the man who is not free,
the bigot; it was taught that only in the form of a bigot could one
tread the path which leads to God, and that only a bigot's life could
be a godly life.

And even here, Life is still in the right--Life that knows not how to
separate Yea from Nay: what is the good of declaring with all one's
might that war is an evil, that one must harm no one, that one must
not act negatively? One is still waging a war even in this, it is
impossible to do otherwise! The good man who has renounced all evil,
and who is afflicted according to his desire with the hemiplegia of
virtue, does not therefore cease from waging war, or from making
enemies, or from saying "nay" and doing "nay." The Christian, for
instance, hates "sin"!--and what on earth is there which he does
not call "sin"! It is precisely because of his belief in a moral
antagonism between good and evil, that the world for him has grown
so full of hatefulness and things that must be combated eternally.
The "good man" sees himself surrounded by evil, and, thanks to the
continual onslaughts of the latter, his eye grows more keen, and in
the end discovers traces of evil in every one of his acts. And thus he
ultimately arrives at the conclusion, which to him is quite logical,
that Nature is evil, that man is corrupted, and that being good is an
act of grace (that is to say, it is impossible to man when he stands
alone). In short: he denies Life, he sees how "good," as the highest
value, condemns Life.... And thus his ideology concerning good and
evil ought to strike him as refuted. But one cannot refute a disease.
Therefore he is obliged to conceive another life!...

Power, whether in the hands of a god or of a man, is always understood
to consist in the ability to harm as well as to help. This is the
case with the Arabs and with the Hebrews, in fact with all strong and
well-constituted races.

The dualistic separation of the two powers is fatal.... In this way
morality becomes the poisoner of life.

A criticism of the good man.--Honesty, dignity, dutifulness, justice,
humanity, loyalty, uprightness, clean conscience--is it really supposed
that, by means of these fine-sounding words, the qualities they stand
for are approved and affirmed for their own sake? Or is it this, that
qualities and states indifferent in themselves have merely been looked
at in a light which lends them some value? Does the worth of these
qualities lie in themselves, or in the use and advantages to which they
lead (or to which they seem to lead, to which they are expected to
lead)?

I naturally do not wish to imply that there is any opposition between
the ego and the alter in the judgment: the question is, whether
it is the results of these qualities, either in regard to him who
possesses them or in regard to environment, society, "humanity," which
lend them their value; or whether they have a value in themselves....
In other words: is it utility which bids men condemn, combat, and
deny the opposite qualities (duplicity, falseness, perversity, lack
of self-confidence, inhumanity)? Is the essence of such qualities
condemned, or only their consequences? In other words: were it
desirable that there should exist no men at all possessed of such
qualities? In any case, this is believed.... But here lies the error,
the shortsightedness, the monocularity of narrow egoism.

Expressed otherwise: would it be desirable to create circumstances in
which the whole advantage would be on the side of the just--so that
all those with opposite natures and instincts would be discouraged and
would slowly become extinct?

At bottom, this is a question of taste and of aesthetics: should we
desire the most honourable types of men--that is to say, the greatest
bores--alone to subsist? the rectangular, the virtuous, the upright,
the good-natured, the straightforward, and the "blockheads"?

If one can imagine the total suppression of the huge number
constituting the "others," even the just man himself ceases from having
a right to exist,--he is, in fact, no longer necessary,--and in this
way it is seen that coarse utility alone could have elevated such an
insufferable virtue to a place of honour.

Desirability may lie precisely on the other side. It might be better
to create conditions in which the "just man" would be reduced to
the humble position of a "useful instrument"--an "ideal gregarious
animal," or at best a herdsman: in short, conditions in which he would
no longer stand in the highest sphere, which requires other qualities.

The "good man" as a tyrant--Mankind has always repeated the same
error: it has always transformed a mere vital measure into the
measure and standard of life;--instead of seeking the standard in
the highest ascent of life, in the problem of growth and exhaustion,
it takes the preservative measures of a very definite kind of life,
and uses them to exclude all other kinds of life, and even to criticise
Life itself and to select from among its forms. That is to say, man
ultimately forgets that measures are a means to an end, and gets to
like them for themselves: they take the place of a goal in his mind,
and even become the standard of goals to him--that is to say, a given
species of man regards his means of existence as the only legitimate
means, as the means which ought to be imposed upon all, as "truth,"
"goodness," "perfection": the given species, in fact, begins to
tyrannise. ... It is a form of faith, of instinct, when a certain
species of man does not perceive that his kind has been conditioned,
when he does not understand his relation to other species. At any rate,
any species of men (a people or a race) seems to be doomed as soon as
it becomes tolerant, grants equal rights, and no longer desires to be
master.

"All good people are weak: they are good because they are not strong
enough to be evil," said the Latuka chieftain Comorro to Baker.



"Disasters are not to the faint-hearted," is a Russian proverb.

Modest, industrious, benevolent, and temperate: thus you would that
men were?--that good men were? But such men I can only conceive as
slaves, the slaves of the future.

The metamorphoses of slavery; its disguise in the cloak of religion;
its transfiguration through morality.

The ideal slave (the "good man").--He who cannot regard himself
as a "purpose," and who cannot give himself any aim whatsoever,
instinctively honours the morality of unselfishness. Everything urges
him to this morality: his prudence, his experience, and his vanity. And
even faith is a form of self-denial.

Atavism: delightful feeling, to be able to obey unconditionally for
once.

Industry, modesty, benevolence, temperance, are just so many
obstacles in the way of sovereign sentiments, of great ingenuity,
of an heroic purpose, of noble existence for one's self.

It is not a question of going ahead (to that end all that is required
is to be at best a herdsman, that is to say, the prime need of the
herd), it is rather a matter of getting along alone, of being able
to be another.

We must realise all that has been accumulated as the result of
the highest moral idealism: how almost all other values have
crystallised round it. This shows that it has been desired for a very
long time and with the strongest passions--and that it has not yet
been attained: otherwise it would have disappointed everybody (that
is to say, it would have been followed by a more moderate valuation).

The saint as the most powerful type of man: this ideal it is
which has elevated the value of moral perfection so high. One would
think that the whole of science had been engaged in proving that the
moral man is the most powerful and most godly.--The conquest of the
senses and the passions--everything inspired terror;--the unnatural
seemed to the spectators to be supernatural and transcendental....

Francis of Assisi: amorous and popular, a poet who combats the order
of rank among souls, in favour of the lowest. The denial of spiritual
hierarchy--"all alike before God."

Popular ideals: the good man, the unselfish man, the saint, the sage,
the just man. O Marcus Aurelius!

I have declared war against the anaemic Christian ideal (together with
what is closely I related to it), not because I want to annihilate
it, but only to put an end to its tyranny and clear the way for
other ideals, for more robust ideals.... The continuance of the
Christian ideal belongs to the most desirable of desiderata: if only
for the sake of the ideals which wish to take their stand beside it and
perhaps above it--they must have opponents, and strong ones too, in
order to grow strong themselves. That is why we immoralists require
the power of morality, our instinct of self-preservation insists
upon our opponents maintaining their strength--all it requires is to
become master of them.

C. Concerning the Slander of the so-called Evil Qualities.

Egoism and its problem! The Christian gloominess of La Rochefoucauld,
who saw egoism in everything, and imagined that he had therefore
reduced the worth of things and virtues! In opposition to him,
I first of all tried to show that nothing else could exist save
egoism,--that in those men whose ego is weak and thin, the power to
love also grows weak,--that the greatest lovers are such owing to the
strength of their ego,--that love is an expression of egoism, etc.
As a matter of fact, the false valuation aims at the interest of those
who find it useful, whom it helps--in fact, the herd; it fosters a
pessimistic mistrust towards the basis of Life; it would fain undermine
the most glorious and most well-constituted men (out of fear); it would
assist the lowly to have the upper hand of their conquerors; it is the
cause of universal dishonesty, especially in the most useful type of
men.

Man is an indifferent egoist: even the cleverest regards his habits as
more important than his advantage.

Egoism! But no one has yet asked: what is the ego like? Everybody
is rather inclined to see all egos alike. This is the result of the
slave theory, of universal suffrage, and of "equality."

The behaviour of a higher man is the result of a very complex set of
motives: any word such as "pity" betrays nothing of this complexity.
The most important factor is the feeling, "who am I? who is the other
relative to me?"--Thus the valuing spirit is continually active.

To think that the history of all moral phenomena may be simplified, as
Schopenhauer thought,--that is to say, that pity is to be found at
the root of every moral impulse that has ever existed hitherto,--is
to be guilty of a degree of nonsense and ingenuousness worthy only
of a thinker who is devoid of all historical instincts and who has
miraculously succeeded in evading the strong schooling in history which
the Germans, from Herder to Hegel, have undergone.

My "pity."--This is a feeling for which I can find no adequate
term: I feel it when I am in the presence of any waste of precious
capabilities, as, for instance, when I contemplate Luther: what power
and what tasteless problems fit for back-woodsmen! (At a time when the
brave and light-hearted scepticism of a Montaigne was already possible
in France!) Or when I see some one standing below where he might have
stood, thanks to the development of a set of perfectly senseless
accidents. Or even when, with the thought of man's destiny in my mind,
I contemplate with horror and contempt the whole system of modern
European politics, which is creating the circumstances and weaving
the fabric of the whole future of mankind. Yes, to what could not
"mankind" attain, if----! This is my "pity"; despite the fact that no
sufferer yet exists with whom I sympathise in this way.

Pity is a waste of feeling, a moral parasite which is injurious to
the health, "it cannot possibly be our duty to increase the evil in
the world." If one does good merely out of pity, it is one's self and
not one's neighbour that one is succouring. Pity does not depend upon
maxims, but upon emotions. The suffering we see infects us; pity is an
infection.

There is no such thing as egoism which keeps within its bounds and
does not exceed them--consequently, the "allowable," the "morally
indifferent" egoism of which some people speak, does not exist at all.

"One is continually promoting the interests of one's 'ego' at the
cost of other people "; "Living consists in living at the cost of
others"--he who has not grasped this fact, has not taken the first step
towards truth to himself.

The "subject" is a piece of fiction: the ego of which every one
speaks when he blames egoism, does not exist at all.

Our "ego"--which is not one with the unitary controlling force of our
beings!--is really only an imagined synthesis; therefore there can be
no "egoistic" actions.

Since all instincts are unintelligent, utility cannot represent a
standpoint as far as they are concerned. Every instinct, when it is
active, sacrifices strength and other instincts into the bargain: in
the end it is stemmed, otherwise it would be the end of everything
owing to the waste it would bring about. Thus: that which is
"unegoistic," self-sacrificing, and imprudent is nothing in particular
--it is common to all the instincts; they do not consider the welfare
of the whole ego (because they simply do not think!), they act
counter to our interests, against the ego: and often for the
ego--innocent in both cases!

The origin of moral values.--Selfishness has as much value as the
physiological value of him who possesses it. Each individual represents
the whole course of Evolution, and he is not, as morals teach,
something that begins at his birth. If he represent the ascent of the
line of mankind, his value is, in fact, very great; and the concern
about his maintenance and the promoting of his growth may even be
extreme. (It is the concern about the promise of the future in him
which gives the well-constituted individual such an extraordinary right
to egoism.) If he represent descending development, decay, chronic
sickening, he has little worth: and the greatest fairness would have
him take as little room, strength, and sunshine as possible from the
well-constituted. In this case society's duty is to suppress egoism
(for the latter may sometimes manifest itself in an absurd, morbid,
and seditious manner): whether it be a question of the decline and
pining away of single individuals or of whole classes of mankind. A
morality and a religion of "love," the curbing of the self-affirming
spirit, and a doctrine encouraging patience, resignation, helpfulness,
and co-operation in word and deed may be of the highest value within
the confines of such classes, even in the eyes of their rulers:
for it restrains the feelings of rivalry, of resentment, and of
envy,--feelings which are only too natural in the bungled and the
botched,--and it even deifies them under the ideal of humility, of
obedience, of slave-life, of being ruled, of poverty, of illness, and
of lowliness. This explains why the ruling classes (or races) and
individuals of all ages have always upheld the cult of unselfishness,
the gospel of the lowly and of "God on the Cross."

The preponderance of an altruistic way of valuing is the result of
a consciousness of the fact that one is botched and bungled. Upon
examination, this point of view turns out to be: "I am not worth
much," simply a psychological valuation; more plainly still: it is
the feeling of impotence, of the lack of the great self-asserting
impulses of power (in muscles, nerves, and ganglia). This valuation
gets translated, according to the particular culture of these classes,
into a moral or religious principle (the pre-eminence of religious or
moral precepts is always a sign of low culture): it tries to justify
itself in spheres whence, as far as it is concerned, the notion "value"
hails. The interpretation by means of which the Christian sinner
tries to understand himself, is an attempt at justifying his lack of
power and of self-confidence: he prefers to feel himself a sinner
rather than feel bad for nothing: it is in itself a symptom of decay
when interpretations of this sort are used at all. In some cases the
bungled and the botched do not look for the reason of their unfortunate
condition in their own guilt (as the Christian does), but in society:
when, however, the Socialist, the Anarchist, and the Nihilist are
conscious that their existence is something for which some one must
be guilty, they are very closely related to the Christian, who also
believes that he can more easily endure his ill ease and his wretched
constitution when he has found some one whom he can hold responsible
for it. The instinct of revenge and resentment appears in both
cases here as a means of enduring life, as a self-preservative measure,
as is also the favour shown to altruistic theory and practice. The
hatred of egoism, whether it be one's own (as in the case of the
Christian), or another's (as in the case of the Socialists), thus
appears as a valuation reached under the predominance of revenge; and
also as an act of prudence on the part of the preservative instinct
of the suffering, in the form of an increase in their feelings of
co-operation and unity.... At bottom, as I have already suggested,
the discharge of resentment which takes place in the act of judging,
rejecting, and punishing egoism (one's own or that of others) is
still a self-preservative measure on the part of the bungled and the
botched. In short: the cult of altruism is merely a particular form of
egoism, which regularly appears under certain definite physiological
circumstances.

When the Socialist, with righteous indignation, cries for "justice,"
"rights," "equal rights," it only shows that he is oppressed by his
inadequate culture, and is unable to understand why he suffers: he
also finds pleasure in crying;--if he were more at ease he would take
jolly good care not to cry in that way: in that case he would seek his
pleasure elsewhere. The same holds good of the Christian: he curses,
condemns, and slanders the "world"--and does not even except himself.
But that is no reason for taking him seriously. In both cases we are
in the presence of invalids who feel better for crying, and who find
relief in slander.

Every society has a tendency to reduce its opponents to
caricatures,--at least in its own imagination,--as also to
starve them. As an example of this sort of caricature we have our
"criminal." In the midst of the Roman and aristocratic order of
values, the Jew was reduced to a caricature. Among artists, "Mrs.
Grundy and the bourgeois" become caricatures; while among pious
people it is the heretics, and among aristocrats, the plebeian. Among
immoralists it is the moralist. Plato, for instance, in my books
becomes a caricature.

All the instincts and forces which morality praises, seem to me to
be essentially the same as those which it slanders and rejects: for
instance, justice as will to power, will to truth as a means in the
service of the will to power.

The turning of man's nature inwards. The process of turning a
nature inwards arises when, owing to the establishment of peace and
society, powerful instincts are prevented from venting themselves
outwardly, and strive to survive harmlessly inside in conjunction with
the imagination. The need of hostility, cruelty, revenge, and violence
is reverted, "it steps backwards"; in the thirst for knowledge there
lurks both the lust of gain and of conquest; in the artist, the powers
of dissimulation and falsehood find their scope; the instincts are thus
transformed into demons with whom a fight takes place, etc.

Falsity.--Every sovereign instinct makes the others its
instruments, its retainers and its sycophants: it never allows itself
to be called by its more hateful name: and it brooks no terms of praise
in which it cannot indirectly find its share. Around every sovereign
instinct all praise and blame in general crystallises into a rigorous
form of ceremonial and etiquette. This is one of the causes of
falsity.

Every instinct which aspires to dominion, but which finds itself
under a yoke, requisitions all the most beautiful names and the
most generally accepted values to strengthen it and to support its
self-esteem, and this explains why as a rule it dares to come forward
under the name of the "master" it is combating and from whom it would
be free (for instance, under the domination of Christian values, the
desires of the flesh and of power act in this way). This is the other
cause of falsity.

In both cases complete ingenuousness reigns: the falseness never
even occurs to the mind of those concerned. It is the sign of a
broken instinct when man sees the motive force and its "expression"
("the mask") as separate things--it is a sign of inner contradiction
and is much less formidable. Absolute innocence in bearing, word,
and passion, a "good conscience" in falseness, and the certainty
wherewith all the grandest and most pompous words and attitudes are
appropriated--all these things are necessary for victory.

In the other case: that is to say, when extreme clearsightedness
is present, the genius of the actor is needful as well as tremendous
discipline in self-control, if victory is to be achieved. That is why
priests are the cleverest and most conscious hypocrites; and then
come princes, in whom their position in life and their antecedents
account for a certain histrionic gift. Society men and diplomatists
come third, and women fourth.

The fundamental thought: Falsity seems so deep, so many-sided, and
the will is directed so inexorably against perfect self-knowledge
and accurate self-classification, that one is very probably right in
supposing that Truth and the will to truth are perhaps something
quite different and only disguises. (The need of faith is the
greatest obstacle in the way of truthfulness.)

"Thou shalt not tell a falsehood": people insist upon truthfulness. But
the acknowledgment of facts (the refusal to allow one's self to be lied
to) has always been greatest with liars: they actually recognised the
reality of this popular "truthfulness." There is too much or too little
being said continually: to insist upon people's exposing themselves
with every word they say, is a piece of naivete.

People say what they think, they are "truthful"; but only under
certain circumstances: that is to say, provided they be understood
(inter pares), and understood with good will into the bargain (once
more inter pares). One conceals one's self in the presence of the
unfamiliar: and he who would attain to something, says what he would
fain have people think about him, but not what he thinks. ("The
powerful man is always a liar.")

The great counterfeit coinage of Nihilism concealed beneath an artful
abuse of moral values:--

Love regarded as self-effacement; as also pity.

The most impersonal intellect ("the philosopher") can know the
truth, "the true essence and nature of things."

Genius, great men are great, because they do not strive
to further their own interests: the value of man increases in
proportion as he effaces himself.

Art as the work of the "pure free-willed subject";
misunderstanding of "objectivity."

Happiness as the object of life: virtue as a means to an end.

The pessimistic condemnation of life by Schopenhauer is a moral one.
Transference of the gregarious standards into the realm of metaphysics.

The "individual" lacks sense, he must therefore have his origin in "the
thing in itself" (and the significance of his existence must be shown
to be "error"); parents are only an "accidental cause."--The mistake
on the part of science in considering the individual as the result of
all past life instead of the epitome of all past life, is now becoming
known.

Systematic falsification of history, so that it may present a
proof of the moral valuation:

The decline of a people and corruption. (b) The rise of a
people and virtue. (c) The zenith of a people ("its culture")
regarded as the result of high moral excellence.

Systematic falsification of great men, great creators, and great
periods. The desire is to make faith that which distinguishes great
men: whereas carelessness in this respect, scepticism, "immorality,"
the right to repudiate a belief, belongs to greatness (Caesar, Frederick
the Great, Napoleon; but also Homer, Aristophanes, Leonardo, Goethe).
The principal fact--their "free will"--is always suppressed.

A great lie in history; as if the corruption of the Church were the
cause of the Reformation! This was only the pretext and self-deception
of the agitators--very strong needs were making themselves felt, the
brutality of which sorely required a spiritual dressing.

Schopenhauer declared high intellectuality to be the emancipation
from the will: he did not wish to recognise the freedom from moral
prejudices which is coincident with the emancipation of a great mind;
he refused to see what is the typical immorality of genius; he artfully
contrived to set up the only moral value he honoured--self-effacement,
as the one condition of highest intellectual activity: "objective"
contemplation. "Truth," even in art, only manifests itself after the
withdrawal of the will....

Through all moral idiosyncrasies I see a fundamentally different
valuation. Such absurd distinctions as "genius" and the world of will,
of morality and immorality, I know nothing about at all. The moral is
a lower kind of animal than the immoral, he is also weaker; indeed--he
is a type in regard to morality, but he is not a type of his own. He
is a copy; at the best, a good copy--the standard of his worth lies
without him. I value a man according to the quantum of power and
fullness of his will: not according to the enfeeblement and moribund
state thereof. I consider that a philosophy which teaches the denial
of will is both defamatory and slanderous.... I test the power of
a will according to the amount of resistance it can offer and the
amount of pain and torture it can endure and know how to turn to its
own advantage; I do not point to the evil and pain of existence with
the finger of reproach, but rather entertain the hope that life may one
day be more evil and more full of suffering than it has ever been.

The zenith of intellectuality, according to Schopenhauer, was to arrive
at the knowledge that all is to no purpose--in short, to recognise what
the good man already does instinctively.... He denies that there can
be higher states of intellectuality--he regards his view as a non plus
ultra.... Here intellectuality is placed much lower than goodness; its
highest value (as art, for instance) would be to lead up to, and to
advise the adoption of, morality, the absolute predominance of moral
values.

Next to Schopenhauer I will now characterise Kant: there was nothing
Greek in Kant; he was quite anti-historical (cf. his attitude in
regard to the French Revolution) and a moral fanatic (see Goethe's
words concerning the radically evil element in human nature[8]).
Saintliness also lurked somewhere in his soul.... I require a
criticism of the saintly type.

Hegel's value: "Passion."

Herbert Spencer's tea-grocer's philosophy: total absence of an ideal
save that of the mediocre man.

Fundamental instinct of all philosophers, historians, and
psychologists: everything of value in mankind, art, history, science,
religion, and technology must be shown to be morally valuable and
morally conditioned, in its aim, means, and result. Everything is
seen in the light of this highest value; for instance, Rousseau's
question concerning civilisation, "Will it make man grow better?"--a
funny question, for the reverse is obvious, and is a fact which
speaks in favour of civilisation.

[Footnote 8: TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.--This is doubtless a reference to a
passage in a letter written by Goethe to Herder, on 7th June 1793,
from the camp at Marienborn, near Mainz, in which the following
words occur:--"Dagegen hat aber auch Kant seinen philosophischen
Mantel, nachdem er ein langes Menschenleben gebraucht hat, ihn von
mancherlei sudelhaften Vorurteilen zu reinigen, freventlich mit dem
Schandfleck des radikalen Bosen beschlabbert, damit doch auch Christen
herbeigelockt werden den Saum zu kussen?--("Kant, on the other hand,
after he had tried throughout his life to keep his philosophical cloak
unsoiled by foul prejudices, wantonly dirtied it in the end with the
disreputable stain of the 'radical evil' in human nature, in order that
Christians too might be lured into kissing its hem.") From this passage
it will be seen how Goethe had anticipated Nietzsche's view of Kant;
namely, that he was a Christian in disguise.]

Religious morality.--Passion, great desire; the passion for power,
love, revenge, and property: the moralists wish to uproot and
exterminate all these things, and "purify" the soul by driving them out
of it.

The argument is: the passions often lead to disaster--therefore, they
are evil and ought to be condemned. Man must wring himself free from
them, otherwise he cannot be a good man....

This is of the same nature as: "If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it
out." In this particular case when, with that "bucolic simplicity,"
the Founder of Christianity recommended a certain practice to His
disciples, in the event of sexual excitement, the result would not be
only the loss of a particular member, but the actual castration of the
whole of the man's character.... And the same applies to the moral
mania, which, instead of insisting upon the control of the passions,
sues for their extirpation. Its conclusion always is: only the
emasculated man is a good man.

Instead of making use of and of economising the great sources of
passion, those torrents of the soul which are often so dangerous,
overwhelming, and impetuous, morality--this most shortsighted and most
corrupted of mental attitudes--would fain make them dry up.

Conquest over the passions?--No, not if this is to mean their
enfeeblement and annihilation. They must be enlisted in our service:
and to this end it may be necessary to tyrannise them a good deal (not
as individuals, but as communities, races, etc.). At length we should
trust them enough to restore their freedom to them: they love us like
good servants, and willingly go wherever our best interests lie.

Intolerance on the part of morality is a sign of man's weakness:
he is frightened of his own "immorality," he must deny his strongest
instincts, because he does not yet know how to use them. Thus the
most fruitful quarters of the globe remain uncultivated longest: the
power is lacking that might become master here....

There are some very simple peoples and men who believe that continuous
fine weather would be a desirable thing: they still believe to-day
in rebus moralibus, that the "good man" alone and nothing else than
the "good man" is to be desired, and that the ultimate end of man's
evolution will be that only the good man will remain on earth (and that
it is only to that end that all efforts should be directed). This is
in the highest degree an uneconomical thought; as we have already
suggested, it is the very acme of simplicity, and it is nothing more
than the expression of the agreeableness which the "good man" creates
(he gives rise to no fear, he permits of relaxation, he gives what one
is able to take).

With a more educated eye one learns to desire exactly the reverse--that
is to say, an ever greater dominion of evil, man's gradual
emancipation from the narrow and aggravating bonds of morality, the
growth of power around the greatest forces of Nature, and the ability
to enlist the passions in one's service.

The whole idea of the hierarchy of the passions: as if the only right
and normal thing were to be led by reason--whereas the passions are
abnormal, dangerous, half-animal, and moreover, in so far as their end
is concerned, nothing more than desires for pleasure....

Passion is deprived of its dignity (1) as if it only manifested
itself in an unseemly way and were not necessary and always the
motive force, (2) inasmuch as it is supposed to aim at no high
purpose--merely at pleasure....

The misinterpretation of passion and reason, as if the latter were
an independent entity, and not a state of relationship between all
the various passions and desires; and as though every passion did not
possess its quantum of reason....

How it was that, under the pressure of the dominion of an ascetic
and self-effacing morality, it was precisely the passions--love,
goodness, pity, even justice, generosity, and heroism, which were
necessarily misunderstood?

It is the richness of a personality, the fullness of it, its power
to flow over and to bestow, its instinctive feeling of ease, and its
affirmative attitude towards itself, that creates great love and great
sacrifices: these passions proceed from strong and godlike personalism
as surely as do the desire to be master, to obtrude, and the inner
certainty that one has a right to everything. The opposite views,
according to the most accepted notions, are indeed common views; and if
one does not stand firmly and bravely on one's legs, one has nothing to
give, and it is perfectly useless to stretch out one's hand either to
protect or to support others....

How was it possible to transform these instincts to such an extent
that man could feel that to be of value which is directed against
himself, so that he could sacrifice himself for another self! O the
psychological baseness and falseness which hitherto has laid down the
law in the Church and in Church-infected philosophy!

If man is thoroughly sinful, then all he can do is to hate himself. As
a matter of fact, he ought not to regard even his fellows otherwise
than he does himself; the love of man requires a justification, and it
is found in the fact that God commanded it.--From this it follows
that all the natural instincts of man (to love, etc.) appear to him
to be, in themselves, prohibited; and that he re-acquires a right to
them only after having denied them as an obedient worshipper of God.
... Pascal, the admirable logician of Christianity, went as far as
this! let any one examine his relations to his sister. "Not to make
one's self loved," seemed Christian to him.

Let us consider how dearly a moral canon such as this ("an ideal")
makes us pay. (Its enemies are--well? The "egoists.")

The melancholy astuteness of self-abasement in Europe (Pascal,
La Rochefoucauld)--inner enfeeblement, discouragement, and
self-consumption of the non-gregarious man.

The perpetual process of laying stress upon mediocre qualities as being
the most valuable (modesty in rank and file, Nature converted into an
instrument).

Pangs of conscience associated with all that is self-glorifying and
original: thus follows the unhappiness--the gloominess of the world
from the standpoint of stronger and better-constituted men!

Gregarious consciousness and timorousness transferred to philosophy and
religion.

Let us leave the psychological impossibility of a purely unselfish
action out of consideration!

My ultimate conclusion is, that the real man represents a much
higher value than the "desirable" man of any ideal that has ever
existed hitherto; that all "desiderata" in regard to mankind have
been absurd and dangerous dissipations by means of which a particular
kind of man has sought to establish his measures of preservation
and of growth as a law for all; that every "desideratum" of this
kind which has been made to dominate has reduced man's worth, his
strength, and his trust in the future; that the indigence and mediocre
intellectuality of man becomes most apparent, even to-day, when he
reveals a desire; that man's ability to fix values has hitherto been
developed too inadequately to do justice to the actual, not merely
to the "desirable," worth of man; that, up to the present, ideals
have really been the power which has most slandered man and power, the
poisonous fumes which have hung over reality, and which have seduced
men to yearn for nonentity....

D. A Criticism of the Words: Improving, Perfecting, Elevating.

The standard according to which the value of moral valuations is to
be determined.

The fundamental fact that has been overlooked: The contradiction
between "becoming more moral" and the elevation and the strengthening
of the type man.

Homo natura: The "will to power."

Moral values regarded as values of appearance and compared with
physiological values.

Reflecting upon generalities is always retrograde: the last of the
"desiderata" concerning men, for instance, have never been regarded as
problems by philosophers. They always postulate the "improvement"
of man, quite guilelessly, as though by means of some intuition they
had been helped over the note of interrogation following the question,
why necessarily "improve!" To what extent is it desirable that
man should be more virtuous, or more intelligent, or happier!
Granting that nobody yet knows the "wherefore?" of mankind, all
such desiderata have no sense whatever; and if one aspires to one
of them--who knows?--perhaps one is frustrating the other. Is an
increase of virtue compatible with an increase of intelligence and
insight? Dubito: only too often shall I have occasion to show that
the reverse is true. Has virtue, as an end, in the strict sense of the
word, not always been opposed to happiness hitherto? And again, does it
not require misfortune, abstinence, and self-castigation as a necessary
means? And if the aim were to arrive at the highest insight, would
it not therefore be necessary to renounce all hope of an increase in
happiness, and to choose danger, adventure, mistrust, and seduction as
a road to enlightenment?... And suppose one will have happiness; maybe
one should join the ranks of the "poor in spirit."

The wholesale deception and fraud of so-called moral improvement.

We do not believe that one man can be another if he is not that
other already--that is to say, if he is not, as often happens, an
accretion of personalities or at least of parts of persons. In this
case it is possible to draw another set of actions from him into the
foreground, and to drive back "the older man." ... The man's aspect
is altered, but not his actual nature.... It is but the merest
factum brutum that any one should cease from performing certain
actions, and the fact allows of the most varied interpretations.
Neither does it always follow therefrom that the habit of performing
a certain action is entirely arrested, nor that the reasons for
that action are dissipated. He whose destiny and abilities make him
a criminal never unlearns anything, but is continually adding to his
store of knowledge: and long abstinence acts as a sort of tonic on
his talent.... Certainly, as far as society is concerned, the only
interesting fact is that some one has ceased from performing certain
actions; and to this end society will often raise a man out of those
circumstances which make him able to perform those actions: this
is obviously a wiser course than that of trying to break his destiny
and his particular nature. The Church,--which has done nothing except
to take the place of, and to appropriate, the philosophic treasures
of antiquity,--starting out from another standpoint and wishing to
secure a "soul" or the "salvation" of a soul, believes in the expiatory
power of punishment, as also in the obliterating power of forgiveness:
both of which supposed processes are deceptions due to religious
prejudice--punishment expiates nothing, forgiveness obliterates
nothing; what is done cannot be undone. Because some one forgets
something it by no means proves that something has been wiped out....
An action leads to certain consequences, both among men and away from
men, and it matters not whether it has met with punishment, or whether
it has been "expiated," "forgiven," or "obliterated," it matters not
even if the Church meanwhile canonises the man who performed it. The
Church believes in things that do not exist, it believes in "Souls"; it
believes in "influences" that do not exist--in divine influences; it
believes in states that do not exist, in sin, redemption, and spiritual
salvation: in all things it stops at the surface and is satisfied with
signs, attitudes, words, to which it lends an arbitrary interpretation.
It possesses a method of counterfeit psychology which is thought out
quite systematically.

"Illness makes men better," this famous assumption which is to be met
with in all ages, and in the mouth of the wizard quite as often as in
the mouth and maw of the people, really makes one ponder. In view of
discovering whether there is any truth in it, one might be allowed to
ask whether there is not perhaps a fundamental relationship between
morality and illness? Regarded as a whole, could not the "improvement
of mankind"--that is to say, the unquestionable softening, humanising,
and taming which the European has undergone within the last two
centuries--be regarded as the result of a long course of secret and
ghastly suffering, failure, abstinence, and grief? Has illness made
"Europeans" "better"? Or, put into other words, is not our modern
soft-hearted European morality, which could be likened to that of the
Chinese, perhaps an expression of physiological deterioration?...
It cannot be denied, for instance, that wherever history shows us
"man" in a state of particular glory and power, his type is always
dangerous, impetuous, and boisterous, and cares little for humanity;
and perhaps, in those cases in which it seems otherwise, all that
was required was the courage or subtlety to see sufficiently below the
surface in psychological matters, in order even in them to discover the
general proposition: "the more healthy, strong, rich, fruitful, and
enterprising a man may feel, the more immoral he will be as well." A
terrible thought, to which one should on no account give way. Provided,
however, that one take a few steps forward with this thought, how
wondrous does the future then appear! What will then be paid for more
dearly on earth, than precisely this very thing which we are all trying
to promote, by all means in our power--the humanising, the improving,
and the increased "civilisation" of man? Nothing would then be more
expensive than virtue: for by means of it the world would ultimately
be turned into a hospital: and the last conclusion of wisdom would be,
"everybody must be everybody else's nurse." Then we should certainly
have attained to the "Peace on earth," so long desired! But how little
"joy we should find in each other's company"! How little beauty, wanton
spirits, daring, and danger! So few "actions" which would make life on
earth worth living! Ah! and no longer any "deeds"! But have not all the
great things and deeds which have remained fresh in the memory of
men, and which have not been destroyed by time, been immoral in the
deepest sense of the word?...

The priests--and with them the half-priests or philosophers of all
ages--have always called that doctrine true, the educating influence
of which was a benevolent one or at least seemed so--that is to say,
tended to "improve." In this way they resemble an ingenuous plebeian
empiric and miracle-worker who, because he had tried a certain poison
as a cure, declared it to be no poison. "By their fruits ye shall know
them"--that is to say, "by our truths." This has been the reasoning
of priests until this day. They have squandered their sagacity, with
results that have been sufficiently fatal, in order to make the "proof
of power" (or the proof "by the fruits ") pre-eminent and even supreme
arbiter over all other forms of proof. "That which makes good must
be good; that which is good cannot lie"--these are their inexorable
conclusions--"that which bears good fruit must consequently be true;
there is no other criterion of truth." ...

But to the extent to which "improving" acts as an argument,
deteriorating must also act as a refutation. The error can be shown to
be an error, by examining the lives of those who represent it: a false
step, a vice can refute.... This indecent form of opposition, which
comes from below and behind--the doglike kind of attack, has not died
out either. Priests, as psychologists, never discovered anything more
interesting than spying out the secret vices of their adversaries--they
prove Christianity by looking about for the world's filth. They apply
this principle more particularly to the greatest on earth, to the
geniuses: readers will remember how Goethe has been attacked on every
conceivable occasion in Germany (Klopstock and Herder were among the
first to give a "good example" in this respect--birds of a feather
flock together).

One must be very immoral in order to make people moral by deeds. The
moralist's means are the most terrible that have ever been used; he
who has not the courage to be an immoralist in deeds may be fit for
anything else, but not for the duties of a moralist.

Morality is a menagerie; it assumes that iron bars may be more useful
than freedom, even for the creatures it imprisons; it also assumes that
there are animal-tamers about who do not shrink from terrible means,
and who are acquainted with the use of red-hot iron. This terrible
species, which enters into a struggle with the wild animal, is called
"priests."

Man, incarcerated in an iron cage of errors, has become a caricature
of man; he is sick, emaciated, ill-disposed towards himself, filled
with a loathing of the impulses of life, filled with a mistrust of
all that is beautiful and happy in life--in fact, he is a wandering
monument of misery. How shall we ever succeed in vindicating this
phenomenon--this artificial, arbitrary, and recent miscarriage--the
sinner--which the priests have bred on their territory?

In order to think fairly of morality, we must put two biological
notions in its place: the taming of the wild beasts, and the rearing
of a particular species.

The priests of all ages have always pretended that they wished to
"improve" ... But we, of another persuasion, would laugh if a
lion-tamer ever wished to speak to us of his "improved" animals. As a
rule, the taming of a beast is only achieved by deteriorating it: even
the moral man is not a better man; he is rather a weaker member of his
species. But he is less harmful....

What I want to make clear, with all the means in my power, is:--

That there is no worse confusion than that which confounds
rearing and taming: and these two things have always been
confused.... Rearing, as I understand it, is a means of husbanding
the enormous powers of humanity in such a way that whole generations
may build upon the foundations laid by their progenitors--not only
outwardly, but inwardly, organically, developing from the already
existing stem and growing stronger....

That there is an exceptional danger in believing that mankind as
a whole is developing and growing stronger, if individuals are seen
to grow more feeble and more equally mediocre. Humanity--mankind--is
an abstract thing: the object of rearing, even in regard to the most
individual cases, can only be the strong man (the man who has no
breeding is weak, dissipated, and unstable).

CONCLUDING REMARKS CONCERNING THE CRITICISM OF MORALITY.

These are the things I demand of you--however badly they may sound in
your ears: that you subject moral valuations themselves to criticism.
That you should put a stop to your instinctive moral impulse--which in
this case demands submission and not criticism--with the question: "why
precisely submission?" That this yearning for a "why?"--for a criticism
of morality should not only be your present form of morality, but the
sublimest of all moralities, and an honour to the age you live in. That
your honesty, your will, may give an account of itself, and not deceive
you: "why not?"--Before what tribunal?

The three postulates:--

All that is ignoble is high (the protest of the "vulgar
man").

All that is contrary to Nature is high (the protest of the
physiologically botched).

All that is of average worth is high (the protest of the
herd, of the "mediocre").

Thus in the history of morality a will to power finds expression,
by means of which, either the slaves, the oppressed, the bungled and
the botched, those that suffer from themselves, or the mediocre,
attempt to make those valuations prevail which favour their existence.

From a biological standpoint, therefore, the phenomenon Morality is of
a highly suspicious nature. Up to the present, morality has developed
at the cost of: the ruling classes and their specific instincts,
the well-constituted and beautiful natures, the independent and
privileged classes in all respects.

Morality, then, is a sort of counter-movement opposing Nature's
endeavours to arrive at a higher type. Its effects are: mistrust of
life in general (in so far as its tendencies are felt to be immoral),
--hostility towards the senses (inasmuch as the highest values are
felt to be opposed to the higher instincts),--Degeneration and
self-destruction of "higher natures," because it is precisely in them
that the conflict becomes conscious.

Which values have been paramount hitherto?

Morality as the leading value in all phases of philosophy (even with
the Sceptics). Result: this world is no good, a "true world" must exist
somewhere.

What is it that here determines the highest value? What, in sooth,
is morality? The instinct of decadence; it is the exhausted and
the disinherited who take their revenge in this way and play the
masters....

Historical proof: philosophers have always been decadents and always in
the pay of Nihilistic religions.

The instinct of decadence appears as the will to power. The
introduction of its system of means: its means are absolutely immoral.

General aspect: the values that have been highest hitherto have been a
special instance of the will to power; morality itself is a particular
instance of immorality.

Why the Antagonistic Values always succumbed.

How was this actually possible! Question: why did life and
physiological well-constitutedness succumb everywhere? Why was there no
affirmative philosophy, no affirmative religion?

The historical signs of such movements: the pagan religion.
Dionysos versus the Christ. The Renaissance. Art.

The strong and the weak: the healthy and the sick; the exception and
the rule. There is no doubt as to who is the stronger....

General view of history; Is man an exception in the history of life
on this account?--An objection to Darwinism. The means wherewith
the weak succeed in ruling have become: instincts, "humanity,"
"institutions." ...

The proof of this rule on the part of the weak is to be found in
our political instincts, in our social values, in our arts, and in our
science.

The instincts of decadence have become master of the instincts of
ascending life.... The will to nonentity has prevailed over the
will to life!

Is this true? is there not perhaps a stronger guarantee of life and
of the species in this victory of the weak and the mediocre?--is it
not perhaps only a means in the collective movement of life, a mere
slackening of the pace, a protective measure against something even
more dangerous?

Suppose the strong were masters in all respects, even in valuing:
let us try and think what their attitude would be towards illness,
suffering, and sacrifice! Self-contempt on the part of the weak would
be the result: they would do their utmost to disappear and to extirpate
their kind. And would this be desirable?--should we really like a
world in which the subtlety, the consideration, the intellectuality,
the plasticity--in fact, the whole influence of the weak--was
lacking?[9] ...

We have seen two "wills to power" at war (in this special case we
had a principle: that of agreeing with the one that has hitherto
succumbed, and of disagreeing with the one that has hitherto
triumphed): we have recognised the "real world" as a "world of lies"
and morality as a form of immorality. We do not say "the stronger
is wrong."

We have understood what it is that has determined the highest values
hitherto, and why the latter should have prevailed over the opposite
value: it was numerically the stronger.

If we now purify the opposite value of the infection, the
half-heartedness, and the degeneration, with which we identify it, we
restore Nature to the throne, free from moralic acid.

[Footnote 9: TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.--We realise here the great difference
between Nietzsche and those who draw premature conclusions from
Darwinism. There is no brutal solution of modern problems in
Nietzsche's philosophy. He did not advocate anything so ridiculous as
the total suppression of the weak and the degenerate. What he wished to
resist and to overthrow was their supremacy, their excessive power.
He felt that there was a desirable and stronger type which was in need
of having its hopes, aspirations, and instincts upheld in defiance of
Christian values.]

Morality, a useful error; or, more clearly still, a necessary and
expedient lie according to the greatest and most impartial of its
supporters.

One ought to be able to acknowledge the truth up to that point where
one is sufficiently elevated no longer to require the disciplinary
school of moral error.--When one judges life morally, it disgusts
one.

Neither should false personalities be invented; one should not say, for
instance, "Nature is cruel." It is precisely when one perceives that
there is no such central controlling and responsible force that one is
relieved!

Evolution of man. A. He tried to attain to a certain power
over Nature and over himself. (Morality was necessary in
order to make man triumph in his struggle with Nature and
"wild animals.")

B. If power over Nature has been attained, this power can
be used as a help in our development: Will to Power as a
self-enhancing and self-strengthening principle.

Morality may be regarded as the illusion of a species, fostered with
the view of urging the individual to sacrifice himself to the future,
and seemingly granting him such a very great value, that with that
self-consciousness he may tyrannise over, and constrain, other sides
of his nature, and find it difficult to be pleased with himself.

We ought to be most profoundly thankful for what morality has done
hitherto: but now it is no more than a burden which may prove fatal.
Morality itself in the form of honesty urges us to deny morality.

To what extent is the self-destruction of morality still a sign of
its own strength? We Europeans have within us the blood of those who
were ready to die for their faith; we have taken morality frightfully
seriously, and there is nothing which we have not, at one time,
sacrificed to it. On the other hand, our intellectual subtlety has
been reached essentially through the vivisection of our consciences.
We do not yet know the "whither" towards which we are urging our
steps, now that we have departed from the soil of our forebears. But
it was on this very soil that we acquired the strength which is now
driving us from our homes in search of adventure, and it is thanks
to that strength that we are now in mid-sea, surrounded by untried
possibilities and things undiscovered--we can no longer choose, we must
be conquerors, now that we have no land in which we feel at home and
in which we would fain "survive." A concealed "yea" is driving us
forward, and it is stronger than all our "nays." Even our strength no
longer bears with us in the old swampy land: we venture out into the
open, we attempt the task. The world is still rich and undiscovered,
and even to perish were better than to be half-men or poisonous men.
Our very strength itself urges us to take to the sea; there where all
suns have hitherto sunk we know of a new world....

III.

CRITICISM OF PHILOSOPHY.

GENERAL REMARKS.

Let us rid ourselves of a few superstitions which heretofore have been
fashionable among philosophers!

Philosophers are prejudiced against appearance, change, pain, death,
the things of the body, the senses, fate, bondage, and all that which
has no purpose.

In the first place, they believe in: absolute knowledge, (2) in
knowledge for its own sake,

in virtue and happiness as necessarily related,

in the recognisability of men's acts. They are led by instinctive
determinations of values, in which former cultures are reflected
(more dangerous cultures too).

What have philosophers lacked! (1) A sense of history, (2) a
knowledge of physiology, (3) a goal in the future.--The ability to
criticise without irony or moral condemnation.

Philosophers have had (1) from times immemorial a wonderful capacity
for the contradictio in adjecto, (2) they have always trusted
concepts as unconditionally as they have mistrusted the senses: it
never seems to have occurred to them that notions and words are our
inheritance of past ages in which thinking was neither very clear nor
very exact.

What seems to dawn upon philosophers last of all: that they must
no longer allow themselves to be presented with concepts already
conceived, nor must they merely purify and polish up those concepts;
but they must first make them, create them, themselves, and
then present them and get people to accept them. Up to the present,
people have trusted their concepts generally, as if they had been a
wonderful dowry from some kind of wonderland: but they constitute
the inheritance of our most remote, most foolish, and most intelligent
forefathers. This piety towards that which already exists in us
is perhaps related to the moral element in science. What we needed
above all is absolute scepticism towards all traditional concepts (like
that which a certain philosopher may already have possessed--and he was
Plato, of course: for he taught the reverse).

Profoundly mistrustful towards the dogmas of the theory of knowledge,
I liked to look now out of this window, now out of that, though I took
good care not to become finally fixed anywhere, indeed I should have
thought it dangerous to have done so--though finally: is it within the
range of probabilities for an instrument to criticise its own fitness?
What I noticed more particularly was, that no scientific scepticism or
dogmatism has ever arisen quite free from all arrieres pensees--that
it has only a secondary value as soon as the motive lying immediately
behind it is discovered.

Fundamental aspect: Kant's, Hegel's, Schopenhauer's, the sceptical and
epochistical, the historifying and the pessimistic attitudes--all have
a moral origin. I have found no one who has dared to criticise the
moral valuations, and I soon turned my back upon the meagre attempts
that have been made to describe the evolution of these feelings (by
English and German Darwinians).

How can Spinoza's position, his denial and repudiation of the moral
values, be explained? (It was the result of his Theodicy!)

Morality regarded as the highest form of protection.--Our world is
either the work and expression (the modus) of God, in which case
it must be in the highest degree perfect (Leibnitz's conclusion
...),--and no one doubted that he knew what perfection must be
like,--and then all evil can only be apparent (Spinoza is more
radical, he says this of good and evil), or it must be a part of God's
high purpose (a consequence of a particularly great mark of favour
on God's part, who thus allows man to choose between good and evil:
the privilege of being no automaton; "freedom," with the ever-present
danger of making a mistake and of choosing wrongly.... See Simplicius,
for instance, in the commentary to Epictetus).

Or our world is imperfect; evil and guilt are real, determined, and
are absolutely inherent to its being; in that case it cannot be the
real world: consequently knowledge can only be a way of denying
the world, for the latter is error which may be recognised as such.
This is Schopenhauer's opinion, based upon Kantian first principles.
Pascal was still more desperate: he thought that even knowledge must be
corrupt and false--that revelation is a necessity if only in order to
recognise that the world should be denied....

Owing to our habit of believing in unconditional authorities, we have
grown to feel a profound need for them: indeed, this feeling is so
strong that, even in an age of criticism such as Kant's was, it showed
itself to be superior to the need for criticism, and, in a certain
sense, was able to subject the whole work of critical acumen, and to
convert it to its own use. It proved its superiority once more in
the generation which followed, and which, owing to its historical
instincts, naturally felt itself drawn to a relative view of all
authority, when it converted even the Hegelian philosophy of evolution
(history rechristened and called philosophy) to its own use, and
represented history as being the self-revelation and self-surpassing
of moral ideas. Since Plato, philosophy has lain under the dominion of
morality. Even in Plato's predecessors, moral interpretations play a
most important role (Anaximander declares that all things are made to
perish as a punishment for their departure from pure being; Heraclitus
thinks that the regularity of phenomena is a proof of the morally
correct character of evolution in general).

The progress of philosophy has been hindered most seriously hitherto
through the influence of moral arrieres-pensees.

In all ages, "fine feelings" have been regarded as arguments, "heaving
breasts" have been the bellows of godliness, convictions have been the
"criteria" of truth, and the need of opposition has been the note of
interrogation affixed to wisdom. This falseness and fraud permeates
the whole history of philosophy. But for a few respected sceptics,
no instinct for intellectual Uprightness is to be found anywhere.
Finally, Kant guilelessly sought to make this thinker's corruption
scientific by means of his concept, "practical reason". He expressly
invented a reason which, in certain cases, would allow one not to
bother about reason--that is to say, in cases where the heart's desire,
morality, or "duty" are the motive power.

Hegel: his popular side, the doctrine of war and of great men. Right
is on the side of the victorious: he (the victorious man) stands for
the progress of mankind. His is an attempt at proving the dominion of
morality by means of history.

Kant: a kingdom of moral values withdrawn from us, invisible, real.

Hegel: a demonstrable process of evolution, the actualisation of the
kingdom of morality.

We shall not allow ourselves to be deceived either in Kant's or Hegel's
way:--We no longer believe, as they did, in morality, and therefore
have no philosophies to found with the view of justifying morality.
Criticism and history have no charm for us in this respect: what is
their charm, then?

The importance of German philosophy (Hegel,) the thinking out of a
kind of pantheism which would not reckon evil, error, and suffering
as arguments against godliness. This grand initiative was misused
by the powers that were (State, etc.) to sanction the rights of the
people that happened to be paramount.

Schopenhauer appears as a stubborn opponent of this idea; he is a
moral man who, in order to keep in the right concerning his moral
valuation, finally becomes a denier of the world. Ultimately he
becomes a "mystic."

I myself have sought an aesthetic justification of the ugliness in
this world. I regarded the desire for beauty and for the persistence
of certain forms as a temporary preservative and recuperative measure:
what seemed to me to be fundamentally associated with pain, however,
was the eternal lust of creating and the eternal compulsion to
destroy.

We call things ugly when we look at them with the desire of attributing
some sense, some new sense, to what has become senseless: it is the
accumulated power of the creator which compels him to regard what has
existed hitherto as no longer acceptable, botched, worthy of being
suppressed--ugly!

My first solution of the problem: Dionysian wisdom. The joy in the
destruction of the most noble thing, and at the sight of its gradual
undoing, regarded as the joy over what is coming and what lies in the
future, which triumphs over actual things, however good they may
be. Dionysian: temporary identification with the principle of life
(voluptuousness of the martyr included).

My innovations. The Development of Pessimism: intellectual
pessimism; moral criticism, the dissolution of the last comfort.
Knowledge, a sign of decay, veils by means of an illusion all strong
action; isolated culture is unfair and therefore strong.

My fight against decay and the increasing weakness of
personality. I sought a new centrum.

The impossibility of this endeavour is recognised.

I therefore travelled farther along the road of dissolution--and
along it I found new sources of strength for individuals. We must
be destroyers!--I perceived that the state of dissolution is one
in which individual beings are able to arrive at a kind of perfection
not possible hitherto, it is an image and isolated example of life
in general. To the paralysing feeling of general dissolution and
imperfection, I opposed the Eternal Recurrence.

People naturally seek the picture of life in that philosophy which
makes them most cheerful--that is to say, in that philosophy which
gives the highest sense of freedom to their strongest instinct. This
is probably the case with me.

German philosophy, as a whole,--Leibnitz, Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer, to
mention the greatest,--is the most out-and-out form of romanticism
and home-sickness that has ever yet existed: it is a yearning for the
best that has ever been known on earth. One is at home nowhere; that
which is ultimately yearned after is a place where one can somehow
feel at home; because one has been at home there before, and that
place is the Greek world! But it is precisely in that direction
that airbridges are broken down--save, of course, the rainbow
of concepts! And the latter lead everywhere, to all the homes and
"fatherlands" that ever existed for Greek souls! Certainly, one must be
very light and thin in order to cross these bridges! But what happiness
lies even in this desire for spirituality, almost for ghostliness!
With it, how far one is from the "press and bustle" and the mechanical
boorishness of the natural sciences, how far from the vulgar din
of "modern ideas"! One wants to get back to the Greeks via the
Fathers of the Church, from North to South, from formulae to forms; the
passage out of antiquity--Christianity--is still a source of joy as a
means of access to antiquity, as a portion of the old world itself,
as a glistening mosaic of ancient concepts and ancient valuations.
Arabesques, scroll-work, rococo of scholastic abstractions--always
better, that is to say, finer and more slender, than the peasant and
plebeian reality of Northern Europe, and still a protest on the part
of higher intellectuality against the peasant war and insurrection
of the mob which have become master of the intellectual taste of
Northern Europe, and which had its leader in a man as great and
unintellectual as Luther:--in this respect German philosophy belongs
to the Counter-Reformation, it might even be looked upon as related
to the Renaissance, or at least to the will to Renaissance, the will
to get ahead with the discovery of antiquity, with the excavation of
ancient philosophy, and above all of pre-Socratic philosophy--the
most thoroughly dilapidated of all Greek temples! Possibly, in a few
hundred years, people will be of the opinion that all German philosophy
derived its dignity from this fact, that step by step it attempted
to reclaim the soil of antiquity, and that therefore all demands for
"originality" must appear both petty and foolish when compared with
Germany's higher claim to having refastened the bonds which seemed for
ever rent--the bonds which bound us to the Greeks, the highest type
of "men" ever evolved hitherto. To-day we are once more approaching
all the fundamental principles of the cosmogony which the Greek mind
in Anaximander, Heraclitus, Parmenides, Empedocles, Democritus, and
Anaxagoras, was responsible for. Day by day we are growing more
Greek; at first, as is only natural, the change remains confined to
concepts and valuations, and we hover around like Greasing spirits: but
it is to be hoped that some day our body will also be involved! Here
lies (and has always lain) my hope for the German nation.

I do not wish to convert anybody to philosophy: it is both necessary
and perhaps desirable that the philosopher should be a rare
plant. Nothing is more repugnant to me than the scholarly praise of
philosophy which is to be found in Seneca and Cicero. Philosophy
has not much in common with virtue. I trust I may be allowed to say
that even the scientific man is a fundamentally different person
from the philosopher. What I most desire is, that the genuine notion
"philosopher" should not completely perish in Germany. There are so
many incomplete creatures in Germany already who would fain conceal
their ineptitude beneath such noble names.

I must set up the highest ideal of a philosopher. Learning is not
everything! The scholar is the sheep in the kingdom of learning; he
studies because he is told to do so, and because others have done so
before him.

The superstition concerning philosophers: They are confounded with
men of science. As if the value of things were inherent in them
and required only to be held on to tightly! To what extent are their
researches carried on under the influence of values which already
prevail (their hatred of appearance of the body, etc.)? Schopenhauer
concerning morality (scorn of Utilitarianism). Ultimately the confusion
goes so far that Darwinism is regarded as philosophy, and thus at the
present day power has gone over to the men of science. Even Frenchmen
like Taine prosecute research, or mean to prosecute research,
without being already in possession of a standard of valuation.
Prostration before "facts" of a kind of cult. As a matter of fact, they
destroy the existing valuations.

The explanation of this misunderstanding. The man who is able to
command is a rare phenomenon; he misinterprets himself. What one
wants to do, above all, is to disclaim all authority and to attribute
it to circumstances. In Germany the critic's estimations belong to
the history of awakening manhood. Lessing, etc. (Napoleon concerning
Goethe). As a matter of fact, the movement is again made retrograde
owing to German romanticism: and the fame of German philosophy
relies upon it as if it dissipated the danger of scepticism and could
demonstrate faith. Both tendencies culminate in Hegel: at bottom,
what he did was to generalise the fact of German criticism and the
fact of German romanticism,--a kind of dialectical fatalism, but to
the honour of intellectuality, with the actual submission of the
philosopher to reality. The critic prepares the way: that is all!

With Schopenhauer the philosopher's mission dawns; it is felt that
the object is to determine values; still under the dominion of
eudemonism. The ideal of Pessimism.

Theory and practice.--This is a pernicious distinction, as if there
were an instinct of knowledge, which, without inquiring into the
utility or harmfulness of a thing, blindly charged at the truth; and
then that, apart from this instinct, there were the whole world of
practical interests.

In contradiction of this, I try to show what instincts are active
behind all these pure theorists,--and how the latter, as a whole,
under the dominion of their instincts, fatally make for something
which to their minds is "truth," to their minds and only to their
minds. The struggle between systems, together with the struggle between
epistemological scruples, is one which involves very special instincts
(forms of vitality, of decline, of classes, of races, etc.).

The so-called thirst for knowledge may be traced to the lust of
appropriation and of conquest: in obedience to this lust the
senses, memory, and the instincts, etc., were developed. The quickest
possible reduction of the phenomena, economy, the accumulation of spoil
from the world of knowledge (i.e. that portion of the world which has
been appropriated and made manageable)....

Morality is therefore such a curious science, because it is in the
highest degree practical: the purely scientific position, scientific
uprightness, is thus immediately abandoned, as soon as morality calls
for replies to its questions. Morality says: I require certain
answers--reasons, arguments; scruples may come afterwards, or they may
not come at all.

"How must one act?" If one considers that one is dealing with a
supremely evolved type--a type which has been "dealt with" for
countless thousands of years, and in which everything has become
instinct, expediency, automatism, fatality, the urgency of this moral
question seems rather funny.

"How must one act?" Morality has always been a subject of
misunderstanding: as a matter of fact, a certain species, which was
constituted to act in a certain way, wished to justify itself by
making its norm paramount.

"How must one act?" this is not a cause, but an effect. Morality
follows, the ideal comes first....

On the other hand, the appearance of moral scruples (or in other
words, the coming to consciousness of the values which guide action)
betray a certain morbidness; strong ages and people do not ponder
over their rights, nor over the principles of action, over instinct or
over reason. Consciousness is a sign that the real morality--that
is to say, the certainty of instinct which leads to a definite
course of action--is going to the dogs.... Every time a new world
of consciousness is created, the moralists are signs of a lesion,
of impoverishment and of disorganisation. Those who are deeply
instinctive fear bandying words over duties: among them are found
pyrrhonic opponents of dialectics and of knowableness in general.... A
virtue is refuted with a "for." ...

Thesis: The appearance of moralists belongs to periods when morality
is declining.

Thesis: The moralist is a dissipator of moral instincts, however much
he may appear to be their restorer.

Thesis: That which really prompts the action of a moralist is not a
moral instinct, but the instincts of decadence, translated into the
forms of morality (he regards the growing uncertainty of the instincts
as corruption).

Thesis: The instincts of decadence which, thanks to moralists, wish
to become master of the instinctive morality of stronger races and
ages, are:--

The instincts of the weak and of the botched;

The instincts of the exceptions, of the anchorites, of the
unhinged, of the abortions of quality or of the reverse;

The instincts of the habitually suffering, who require a noble
interpretation of their condition, and who therefore require to be as
poor physiologists as possible.

The humbug of the scientific spirit.--One should not affect the
spirit of science, when the time to be scientific is not yet at
hand; but even the genuine investigator has to abandon vanity, and
has to affect a certain kind of method which is not yet seasonable.
Neither should we falsify things and thoughts, which we have arrived
at differently, by means of a false arrangement of deduction and
dialectics. It is thus that Kant in his "morality" falsifies his
inner tendency to psychology; a more modern example of the same thing
is Herbert Spencer's Ethics. A man should neither conceal nor
misrepresent the facts concerning the way in which he conceived his
thoughts. The deepest and most inexhaustible books will certainly
always have something of the aphoristic and impetuous character of
Pascal's Pensees. The motive forces and valuations have lain long
below the surface; that which comes uppermost is their effect.

I guard against all the humbug of a false scientific spirit:--

In respect of the manner of demonstration, if it does not
correspond to the genesis of the thoughts;

In respect of the demands for methods which, at a given period in
science, may be quite impossible;

In respect of the demand for objectivity for cold impersonal
treatment, where, as in the case of all valuations, we describe
ourselves and our intimate experiences in a couple of words. There
are ludicrous forms of vanity, as, for instance, Sainte-Beuve's. He
actually worried himself all his life because he had shown some warmth
or passion either "pro" or "con," and he would fein have lied that
fact out of his life.

"Objectivity" in the philosopher: moral indifference in regard to one's
self, blindness in regard to either favourable or fetal circumstances.
Unscrupulousness in the use of dangerous means; perversity and
complexity of character considered as an advantage and exploited.

My profound indifference to myself: I refuse to derive any advantage
from my knowledge, nor do I wish to escape any disadvantages which it
may entail.--I include among these disadvantages that which is called
the perversion of character; this prospect is beside the point: I use
my character, but I try neither to understand it nor to change it--the
personal calculation of virtue has not entered my head once. It strikes
me that one closes the doors of knowledge as soon as one becomes
interested in one's own personal case--or even in the "Salvation of
one's soul"!... One should not take one's morality too seriously, nor
should one forfeit a modest right to the opposite of morality....

A sort of heritage of morality is perhaps presupposed here: one
feels that one can be lavish with it and fling a great deal of it out
of the window without materially reducing one's means. One is never
tempted to admire "beautiful souls," one always knows one's self to be
their superior. The monsters of virtue should be met with inner scorn;
deniaiser la vertu--Oh, the joy of it!

One should revolve round one's self, have no desire to be "better" or
"anything else" at all than one is. One should be too interested to
omit throwing the tentacles or meshes of every morality out to things.

Concerning the psychology of philosophers. They should be
psychologists--this was possible only from the nineteenth century
onwards--and no longer little Jack Homers, who see three or four
feet in front of them, and are almost satisfied to burrow inside
themselves. We psychologists of the future are not very intent on
self-contemplation: we regard it almost as a sign of degeneration when
an instrument endeavours "to know itself":[10] we are instruments of
knowledge and we would fain possess all the precision and ingenuousness
of an instrument--consequently we may not analyse or "know" ourselves.
The first sign of a great psychologist's self-preservative instinct:
he never goes in search of himself, he has no eye, no interest, no
inquisitiveness where he himself is concerned.... The great egoism
of our dominating will insists on our completely shutting our eyes to
ourselves, and on our appearing "impersonal," "disinterested"!--Oh to
what a ridiculous degree we are the reverse of this!

We are no Pascals, we are not particularly interested in the
"Salvation of the soul," in our own happiness, and in our own
virtue.--We have neither enough time nor enough curiosity to be so
concerned with ourselves. Regarded more deeply, the case is again
different, we thoroughly mistrust all men who thus contemplate their
own navels: because introspection seems to us a degenerate form of
the psychologist's genius, as a note of interrogation affixed to the
psychologist's instinct: just as a painter's eye is degenerate which is
actuated by the will to see for the sake of seeing.

[Footnote 10: TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.--Goethe invariably inveighed against
the "gnoti seauton" of the Socratic school; he was of the opinion that
an animal which tries to see its inner self must be sick.]

A CRITICISM OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

The apparition of Greek philosophers since the time of Socrates is a
symptom of decadence; the anti-Hellenic instincts become paramount.

The "Sophist" is still quite Hellenic--as are also Anaxagoras,
Democritus, and the great Ionians; but only as transitional forms. The
polis loses its faith in the unity of its culture, in its rights of
dominion over every other polis.... Cultures, that is to say, "the
gods," are exchanged, and thus the belief in the exclusive prerogative
of the deus autochthonus is lost. Good and Evil of whatever origin
get mixed: the boundaries separating good from evil gradually
vanish.... This is the "Sophist." ...

On the other hand, the "philosopher" is the reactionary: he insists
upon the old virtues. He sees the reason of decay in the decay of
institutions: he therefore wishes to revive old institutions;--he
sees decay in the decline of authority: he therefore endeavours to
find new authorities (he travels abroad, explores foreign literature
and exotic religions....);--he will reinstate the ideal polis, after
the concept "polis" has become superannuated (just, as the Jews kept
themselves together as a "people" after they had fallen into slavery).
They become interested in all tyrants: their desire is to re-establish
virtue with "force majeure".

Gradually everything genuinely Hellenic is held responsible for
the state of decay (and Plato is just as ungrateful to Pericles,
Homer, tragedy, and rhetoric as the prophets are to David and
Saul). The downfall of Greece is conceived as an objection to the
fundamental principles of Hellenic culture: the profound error of
philosophers--Conclusion: the Greek world perishes. The cause thereof:
Homer, mythology, ancient morality, etc.

The anti-Hellenic development of philosophers' valuations:--the
Egyptian influence ("Life after death" made into law....);--the Semitic
influence (the "dignity of the sage," the "Sheik");--the Pythagorean
influence, the subterranean cults, Silence, means of terrorisation
consisting of appeals to a "Beyond," mathematics: the religious
valuation consisting of a sort of intimacy with a cosmic entity;--the
sacerdotal, ascetic, and transcendental influences;--the dialectical
influence,--I am of opinion that even Plato already betrays revolting
and pedantic meticulousness in his concepts!--Decline of good
intellectual taste: the hateful noisiness of every kind of direct
dialectics seems no longer to be felt.

The two decadent tendencies and extremes run side by side: (a) the
luxuriant and more charming kind of decadence which shows a love of
pomp and art, and (b) the gloomy kind, with its religious and moral
pathos, its stoical self-hardening tendency, its Platonic denial of the
senses, and its preparation of the soil for the coming of Christianity.

To what extent psychologists have been corrupted by the moral
idiosyncrasy!--Not one of the ancient philosophers had the courage to
advance the theory of the non-free will (that is to say, the theory
that denies morality);--not one had the courage to identify the typical
feature of happiness, of every kind of happiness "pleasure"), with the
will to power: for the pleasure of power was considered immoral;--not
one had the courage to regard virtue as a result of immorality (as a
result of a will to power) in the service of a species (or of a race,
or of a polis); for the will to power was considered immoral.

In the whole of moral evolution, there is no sign of truth: all
the conceptual elements which come into play are fictions; all the
psychological tenets are false; all the forms of logic employed in this
department of prevarication are sophisms. The chief feature of all
moral philosophers is their total lack of intellectual cleanliness and
self-control: they regard "fine feelings" as arguments: their heaving
breasts seem to them the bellows of godliness.... Moral philosophy is
the most suspicious period in the history of the human intellect.

The first great example: in the name of morality and under its
patronage, a great wrong was committed, which as a matter of fact was
in every respect an act of decadence. Sufficient stress cannot be laid
upon this fact, that the great Greek philosophers not only represented
the decadence of every kind of Greek ability, but also made it
contagious.... This "virtue" made wholly abstract was the highest
form of seduction; to make oneself abstract means to turn one's back on
the world.

The moment is a very remarkable one: the Sophists are within sight
of the first criticism of morality, the first knowledge of
morality:--they classify the majority of moral valuations (in view
of their dependence upon local conditions) together;--they lead one
to understand that every form of morality is capable of being upheld
dialectically: that is to say, they guessed that all the fundamental
principles of a morality must be sophistical--a proposition which
was afterwards proved in the grandest possible style by the ancient
philosophers from Plato onwards (up to Kant);--they postulate the
primary truth that there is no such thing as a "moral per se," a
"good per se," and that it is madness to talk of "truth" in this
respect.

Wherever was intellectual uprightness to be found in those days?

The Greek culture of the Sophists had grown out of all the Greek
instincts; it belongs to the culture of the age of Pericles as
necessarily as Plato does not: it has its predecessors in Heraclitus,
Democritus, and in the scientific types of the old philosophy; it
finds expression in the elevated culture of Thucydides, for instance.
And--it has ultimately shown itself to be right: every step in the
science of epistemology and morality has confirmed the attitude of
the Sophists.... Our modern attitude of mind is, to a great extent,
Heraclitean, Democritean, and Protagorean ... to say that it is
Protagorean is even sufficient: because Protagoras was in himself a
synthesis of the two men Heraclitus and Democritus.

(Plato: a great Cagliostro,--let us think of how Epicurus judged
him; how Timon, Pyrrho's friend, judged him----Is Plato's integrity by
any chance beyond question?... But we at least know what he wished to
have taught as absolute truth--namely, things which were to him not
even relative truths: the separate and immortal life of "souls.")

The Sophists are nothing more, nor less than realists: they elevate
all the values and practices which are common property to the rank of
values--they have the courage, peculiar to all strong intellects,
which consists in knowing their immorality....

Is it to be supposed that these small Greek independent republics,
so filled with rage and envy that they would fain have devoured each
other, were led by principles of humanity and honesty? Is Thucydides
by any chance reproached with the words he puts into the mouths of
the Athenian ambassadors when they were treating with the Melii anent
the question of destruction or submission? Only the most perfect
Tartuffes could have been able to speak of virtue in the midst of that
dreadful strain--or if not Tartuffes, at least detached philosophers,
anchorites, exiles, and fleers from reality.... All of them, people
who denied things in order to be able to exist.

The Sophists were Greeks: when Socrates and Plato adopted the cause
of virtue and justice, they were Jews or I know not what. Grote's
tactics in the defence of the Sophists are false: he would like to
raise them to the rank of men of honour and moralisers--but it was
their honour not to indulge in any humbug with grand words and virtues.

The great reasonableness underlying all moral education lay in the fact
that it always attempted to attain to the certainty of an instinct:
so that neither good intentions nor good means, as such, first required
to enter consciousness. Just as the soldier learns his exercises, so
should man learn how to act in life. In truth this unconsciousness
belongs to every kind of perfection: even the mathematician carries out
his calculations unconsciously....

What, then, does Socrates' reaction mean, which recommended
dialectics as the way to virtue, and which was charmed when morality
was unable to justify itself logically? But this is precisely what
proves its superiority--without unconsciousness it is worth nothing!

In reality it means the dissolution of Greek instincts, when
demonstrability is posited as the first condition of personal
excellence in virtue. All these great "men of virtue" and of words are
themselves types of dissolution.

In practice, it means that moral judgments have been torn from the
conditions among which they grew and in which alone they had some
sense, from their Greek and Graeco-political soil, in order to be
denaturalised under the cover of being made sublime. The great
concepts "good" and "just" are divorced from the first principles of
which they form a part, and, as "ideas" become free, degenerate
into subjects for discussion. A certain truth is sought behind them;
they are regarded as entities or as symbols of entities: a world is
invented where they are "at home," and from which they are supposed
to hail.

In short: the scandal reaches its apotheosis in Plato.... And then it
was necessary to invent the perfectly abstract man also:--good, just,
wise, and a dialectician to boot--in short, the scarecrow of the
ancient philosopher: a plant without any soil whatsoever; a human race
devoid of all definite ruling instincts; a virtue which "justifies"
itself with reasons. The perfectly absurd "individual" per se! the
highest form of Artificiality....

Briefly, the denaturalisation of moral values resulted in the creation
of a degenerate type of man--"the good man," "the happy man,"
"the wise man."--Socrates represents a moment of the most profound
perversity in the history of values.

Socrates.--This veering round of Greek taste in favour of dialectics
is a great question. What really happened then? Socrates, the
roturier who was responsible for it, was thus able to triumph over
a more noble taste, the taste of the noble:--the mob gets the upper
hand along with dialectics. Previous to Socrates dialectic manners
were repudiated in good society; they were regarded as indecent; the
youths were Warned against them. What was the purpose of this display
of reasons? Why demonstrate? Against others one could use authority.
One commanded, and that sufficed. Among friends, inter pares, there
was tradition--also a form of authority: and last but not least,
one understood each other. There was no room found for dialectics.
Besides, all such modes of presenting reasons were distrusted. All
honest things do not carry their reasons in their hands in such
fashion. It is indecent to show all the five fingers at the same time.
That which can be "demonstrated" is little worth. The instinct of
every party-speaker tells him that dialectics excites mistrust and
carries little conviction. Nothing is more easily wiped away than the
effect of a dialectician. It can only be a last defence. One must
be in an extremity; it is necessary to have to extort one's rights;
otherwise one makes no use of dialectics. That is why the Jews were
dialecticians, Reynard the Fox was a dialectician, and so was Socrates.
As a dialectician a person has a merciless instrument in his hand:
he can play the tyrant with it; he compromises when he conquers. The
dialectician leaves it to his opponent to demonstrate that he is not an
idiot; he is made furious and helpless, while the dialectician himself
remains calm and still possessed of his triumphant reasoning powers--he
paralyses his opponent's intellect.--The dialectician's irony is a
form of mob-revenge: the ferocity of the oppressed lies in the cold
knife-cuts of the syllogism....

In Plato, as in all men of excessive sensuality and wild fancies, the
charm of concepts was so great, that he involuntarily honoured and
deified the concept as a form of ideal. Dialectical intoxication: as
the consciousness of being able to exercise control over one's self by
means of it--as an instrument of the Will to Power.

The problem of Socrates.--The two antitheses: the tragic and the
Socratic spirits--measured according to the law of Life.

To what extent is the Socratic spirit a decadent phenomenon? to what
extent are robust health and power still revealed by the whole attitude
of the scientific man, his dialectics, his ability, and his severity?
(the health of the plebeian; whose malice, esprit frondeur,
whose astuteness, whose rascally depths, are held in check by his
cleverness; the whole type is "ugly").

Uglification: self-derision, dialectical dryness, intelligence in
the form of a tyrant against the "tyrant" (instinct). Everything in
Socrates is exaggeration, eccentricity, caricature; he is a buffoon
with the blood of Voltaire in his veins.

He discovers a new form of agon; he is the first fencing-master in
the superior classed of Athens; he stands for nothing else than the
highest form of cleverness: he calls it "virtue" (he regarded it as a
means of salvation; he did not choose to be clever, cleverness was
de rigueur); the proper thing is to control one's self in suchwise
that one enters into a struggle not with passions but with reasons
as one's weapons (Spinoza's stratagem--the unravelment of the errors
of passion);--it is desirable to discover how every one may be caught
once he is goaded into a passion, and to know how illogically passion
proceeds; self-mockery is practised in order to injure the very roots
of the feelings of resentment.

It is my wish to understand which idiosyncratic states form a part of
the Socratic problem: its association of reason, virtue, and happiness.
With this absurd doctrine of the identity of these things it succeeded
in charming the world: ancient philosophy could not rid itself of
this doctrine....

Absolute lack of objective interest: hatred of science: the
idiosyncrasy of considering one's self a problem. Acoustic
hallucinations in Socrates: morbid element. When the intellect is
rich and independent, it most strongly resists preoccupying itself
with morality. How is it that Socrates is a moral-maniac?--Every
"practical" philosophy immediately steps into the foreground in times
of distress. When morality and religion become the chief interests of a
community, they are signs of a state of distress.

Intelligence, clearness, hardness, and logic as weapons against the
wildness of the instincts. The latter must be dangerous and must
threaten ruin, otherwise no purpose can be served by developing
intelligence to this degree of tyranny. In order to make a tyrant
of intelligence the instincts must first have proved themselves
tyrants. This is the problem. It was a very timely one in those days.
Reason became virtue--virtue equalled happiness.

Solution: Greek philosophers stand upon the same fundamental fact
of their inner experiences as Socrates does; five feet from excess,
from anarchy and from dissolution--all decadent men. They regard him
as a doctor: Logic as will to power, as will to control self, as will
to "happiness." The wildness and anarchy of Socrates' instincts is a
sign of decadence, as is also the superfoetation of logic and clear
reasoning in him. Both are abnormities, each belongs to the other.
Criticism. Decadence reveals itself in this concern about "happiness"
(i.e. about the "salvation of the soul"; i.e. to feel that one's
condition is a danger). Its fanatical interest in "happiness" shows
the pathological condition of the subconscious self: it was a vital
interest. The alternative which faced them all was: to be reasonable
or to perish. The morality of Greek philosophers shows that they felt
they were in danger.

Why everything resolved itself into mummery.--Rudimentary
psychology, which only considered the conscious lapses of men (as
causes), which regarded "consciousness" as an attribute of the soul,
and which sought a will behind every action (i.e. an intention),
could only answer "Happiness" to the question: "What does man
desire?" (it was impossible to answer "Power," because that would have
been immoral);--consequently behind all men's actions there is the
intention of attaining to happiness by means of them. Secondly: if man
as a matter of fact does not attain to happiness, why is it? Because he
mistakes the means thereto.--What is the unfailing means of acquiring
happiness? Answer: virtue.--Why virtue? Because virtue is supreme
rationalness, and rationalness makes mistakes in the choice of means
impossible: virtue in the form of reason is the way to happiness.
Dialectics is the constant occupation of virtue, because it does away
with passion and intellectual cloudiness.

As a matter of fact, man does not desire "happiness." Pleasure is
a sensation of power: if the passions are excluded, those states of
the mind are also excluded which afford the greatest sensation of
power and therefore of pleasure. The highest rationalism is a state of
cool clearness, which is very far from being able to bring about that
feeling of power which every kind of exaltation involves....

The ancient philosophers combat everything that intoxicates and
exalts--everything that impairs the perfect coolness and impartiality
of the mind.... They were consistent with their first false principle:
that consciousness was the highest, the supreme state of mind, the
prerequisite of perfection--whereas the reverse is true....

Any kind of action is imperfect in proportion as it has been willed or
conscious. The philosophers of antiquity were the greatest duffers
in practice, "because they condemned themselves" theoretically
to dufferdom,.... In practice everything resolved itself into
theatricalness: and he who saw through it, as Pyrrho did, for instance,
thought as everybody did--that is to say, that in goodness and
uprightness "paltry people" were far superior to philosophers.

All the deeper natures of antiquity were disgusted at the philosophers
of virtue; all people saw in them was brawlers and actors. (This was
the judgment passed on Plato by Epicurus and Pyrrho.)

Result: In practical life, in patience, goodness, and mutual
assistance, paltry people were above them:--this is something like the
judgment Dostoiewsky or Tolstoy claims for his muzhiks: they are more
philosophical in practice, they are more courageous in their way of
dealing with the exigencies of life....

A criticism of the philosopher.--Philosophers and moralists merely
deceive themselves when they imagine that they escape from decadence
by opposing it. That lies beyond their wills: and however little they
may be aware of the fact, it is generally discovered, subsequently that
they were among the most powerful promoters of decadence.

Let us examine the philosophers of Greece--Plato, for instance. He
it was who separated the instincts from the polis, from the love of
contest, from military efficiency, from art, beauty, the mysteries,
and the belief in tradition and in ancestors.... He was the seducer of
the nobles: he himself seduces through the roturier Socrates.... He
denied all the first principles of the "noble Greek" of sterling worth;
he made dialectics an everyday practice, conspired with the tyrants,
dabbled in politics for the future, and was the example of a man whose
instincts were the example of a man whose instincts were most
perfectly separated from tradition. He is profound and passionate in
everything that is anti-Hellenic....

One after the other, these great philosophers represent the typical
forms of decadence: the moral and religious idiosyncrasy, anarchy,
nihilism, (adiaphoria), cynicism, hardening principles, hedonism, and
reaction.

The question of "happiness," of "virtue," and of the "salvation of the
soul," is the expression of physiological contradictoriness in these
declining natures: their instincts lack all balance and purpose.

To what extent do dialectics and the faith in reason rest upon moral
prejudices? With Plato we are as the temporary inhabitants of an
intelligible world of goodness, still in possession of a bequest from
former times: divine dialectics taking its root in goodness leads to
everything good (it follows, therefore, that it must lead "backwards").
Even Descartes had a notion of the fact that, according to a thoroughly
Christian and moral attitude of mind, which includes a belief in a
good God as the Creator of all things, the truthfulness of God
guarantees the judgments of our senses for us. But for this religious
sanction and warrant of our senses and our reason, whence should
we obtain our right to trust in existence? That thinking must be a
measure of reality,--that what cannot be the subject of thought, cannot
exist,--is a coarse non plus ultra of a moral blind confidence
(in the essential principle of truth at the root of all things); this
in itself is a mad assumption which our experience contradicts every
minute. We cannot think of anything precisely as it is....

The real philosophers of Greece are those which came before Socrates
(with Socrates something changes). They are all distinguished men,
they take their stand away from the people and from usage; they have
travelled; they are earnest to the point of sombreness, their eyes
are calm, and they are not unacquainted with the business of state and
diplomacy. They anticipated all the great concepts which coming sages
were to have concerning things in general: they themselves represented
these concepts, they made systems out of themselves. Nothing run give a
higher idea of Greek intellect than this sudden fruitfulness in types,
than this involuntary completeness in the drawing up of all the great
possibilities of the philosophical ideal. I can see only one original
figure in those that came afterwards: a late arrival but necessarily
the last--Pyrrho the nihilist. His instincts were opposed to the
influences which had become ascendant in the mean-time the Socratic
school, Plato, and the artistic optimism of Heraclitus. (Pyrrho goes
back to Democritus via Protagoras....)

Wise weariness: Pyrrho. To live humbly among the humble. Devoid of
pride. To live in the vulgar way; to honour and believe what every
one believes. To be on one's guard against science and intellect, and
against everything that puffs one out. ... To be simply patient
in the extreme, careless and mild;--apatheia or, better still,
prautehs. A Buddhist for Greece, bred amid the tumult of the
Schools; born alter his time; weary; an example of the protest of
weariness against the eagerness of dialecticians; the incredulity of
the tired man in regard to the importance of everything. He had seen
Alexander; he had seen the Indian penitents. To such late-arrivals
and creatures of great subtlety, everything lowly, poor, and idiotic,
is seductive. It narcoticises: it gives them relaxation (Pascal).
On the other hand, they mix with the crowd, and get confounded
with the rest. These weary creatures need warmth.... To overcome
contradiction; to do away with contests; to have no will to excel in
any way; to deny the Greek instincts (Pyrrho lived with his sister,
who was a midwife.) To rig out wisdom in such a way that it no longer
distinguishes; to give it the ragged mantle of poverty; to perform
the lowest offices, and to go to market and sell sucking-pigs....
Sweetness, clearness, indifference; no need of virtues that require
attitudes; to be equal to all even in virtue: final conquest of one's
self, final indifference.

Pyrrho and Epicurus;--two forms of Greek decadence; they are related
in their hatred of dialectics and all theatrical virtues. These
two things together were then called philosophy; Pyrrho and Epicurus
intentionally held that which they loved in low esteem; they chose
common and even contemptible names for it, and they represented a state
in which one is neither ill, healthy, lively, nor dead.... Epicurus was
more naif, more idyllic, more grateful; Pyrrho had more experience of
the world, had travelled more, and was more nihilistic. His life was a
protest against the great doctrine of Identity (Happiness = Virtue =
Knowledge). The proper way of living is not promoted by science: wisdom
does not make "wise." ... The proper way of living does not desire
happiness, it turns away from happiness....

The war against the "old faith," as Epicurus waged it, was, strictly
speaking, a struggle against pre-existing Christianity--the struggle
against a world then already gloomy, moralised, acidified throughout
with feelings of guilt, and grown old and sick.

Not the "moral corruption" of antiquity, but precisely its moral
infectedness was the prerequisite which enabled Christianity to become
its master. Moral fanaticism (in short: Plato) destroyed paganism by
transvaluing its values and poisoning its innocence. We ought at last
to understand that what was then destroyed was higher than what
prevailed! Christianity grew on the soil of psychological corruption,
and could only take root in rotten ground.

Science: as a disciplinary measure or as an instinct--I see a decline
of the instincts in Greek philosophers: otherwise they could not have
been guilty of the profound error of regarding the conscious state
as the more valuable state. The intensity of consciousness stands in
the inverse ratio to the ease and speed of cerebral transmission.
Greek philosophy upheld the opposite view, which is always the sign of
weakened instincts.

We must, in sooth, seek perfect life there where it is least
conscious (that is to say, there where it is least aware of its logic,
its reasons, its means, its intentions, and its utility). The return
to the facts of common sense, the facts of the common man and of
"paltry people." Honesty and intelligence stored up for generations
of people who are quite unconscious of their principles, and who
even have some fear of principles. It is not reasonable to desire a
reasoning virtue. ... A philosopher is compromised by such a desire.

When morality--that is to say, refinement, prudence, bravery, and
equity--have been stored up in the same way, thanks to the moral
efforts of a whole succession of generations, the collective power of
this hoard of virtue projects its rays even into that sphere where
honesty is most seldom present--the sphere of intellect. When a
thing becomes conscious, it is the sign of a state of ill-ease in
the organism; something new has got to be found, the organism is not
satisfied or adapted, it is subject to distress, suspense, and it is
hypersensitive--precisely all this is consciousness....

Gennius lies in the instincts; goodness does too. One only acts
perfectly when one acts instinctively. Even from the moral point of
view all thinking which is conscious is merely a process of groping,
and in the majority of cases an attack on morality. Scientific honesty
is always sacrificed when a thinker begins to reason: let any one try
the experiment: put the wisest man in the balance, and then let him
discourse upon morality....

It could also be proved that the whole of a man's conscious thinking
shows a much lower standard of morality than the thoughts of the same
man would show if they were led by his instincts.

The struggle against Socrates, Plato, and all the Socratic schools,
proceeds from the profound instinct that man is not made better
when he is shown that virtue may be demonstrated or based upon
reason.... This in the end is the niggardly fact, it was the agonal
instinct in all these born dialecticians, which drove them to glorify
their personal abilities as the highest of all qualities, and to
represent every other form of goodness as conditioned by them. The
anti-scientific spirit of all this "philosophy": it will never admit
that it is not right.

This is extraordinary. From its very earliest beginnings, Greek
philosophy carries on a struggle against science with the weapons of
a theory of knowledge, especially of scepticism; and why is this? It
is always in favour of morality.... (Physicists and medical men
are hated.) Socrates, Aristippus, the Megarian school, the Cynics,
Epicurus and Pyrrho--a general onslaught upon knowledge in favour
of morality.... (Hatred of dialectics also.) There is still a
problem to be solved: they approach sophistry in order to be rid of
science. On the other hand, the physicists are subjected to such an
extent that, among their first principles, they include the theory of
truth and of real being: for instance, the atom, the four elements
(juxtaposition of being, in order to explain its multiformity and its
transformations). Contempt of objectivity in interests is taught:
return to practical interest, and to the personal utility of all
knowledge....

The struggle against science is directed at: (1) its pathos
(objectivity); (2) its means (that is to say, at its utility); (3) its
results (which are considered childish). It is the same struggle which
is taken up later on by the Church in the name of piety: the Church
inherited the whole arsenal of antiquity for her war with science. The
theory of knowledge played the same part in the affair as it did in
Kant's or the Indians' case. There is no desire whatever to be troubled
with it, a free hand is wanted for the "purpose" that is envisaged.

Against what powers are they actually defending themselves? Against
dutifulness, against obedience to law, against the compulsion of going
hand in hand--I believe this is what is called Freedom....

This is how decadence manifests itself: the instinct of solidarity is
so degenerate that solidarity itself gets to be regarded as tyranny:
no authority or solidarity is brooked, nobody any longer desires to
fall in with the rank and file, and to adopt its ignobly slow pace. The
slow movement which is the tempo of science is generally hated, as are
also the scientific man's indifference in regard to getting on, his
long breath, and his impersonal attitude.

At bottom, morality is hostile to science: Socrates was so already
too--and the reason is, that science considers certain things important
which have no relation whatsoever to "good" and "evil," and which
therefore reduce the gravity of our feelings concerning "good" and
"evil." What morality requires is that the whole of a man should serve
it with all his power: it considers it waste on the part of a creature
that can ill afford waste, when a man earnestly troubles his head
about stars or plants. That is why science very quickly declined
in Greece, once Socrates had inoculated scientific work with the
disease of morality. The mental attitudes reached by a Democritus, a
Hippocrates, and a Thucydides, have not been reached a second time.--

The problem of the philosopher and of the scientific man.--The
influence of age; depressing habits (sedentary study a la Kant;
over-work; inadequate nourishment of the brain; reading). A more
essential question still: is it not already perhaps a symptom of
decadence when thinking tends to establish generalities?

Objectivity regarded as the disintegration of the will (to be able
to remain as detached as possible ...). This presupposes a tremendous
adiaphora in regard to the strong passions: a kind of isolation, an
exceptional position, opposition to the normal passions.

Type: desertion of home-country emigrants go ever greater distances
afield; growing exoticism; the voice of the old imperative dies
away;--and the continual question "whither?" ("happiness") is a sign
of emancipation from forms of organisation, a sign of breaking loose
from everything.

Problem: is the man of science more of a decadent symptom than the
philosopher?--as a whole scientific man is not, cut loose from
everything, only a part of his being is consecrated exclusively to the
service of knowledge and disciplined to maintain a special attitude and
point of view; in his department he is in need of all the virtues
of a strong race, of robust health, of great severity, manliness and
intelligence. He is rather a symptom of the great multiformity of
culture than of the effeteness of the latter. The decadent scholar
is a bad scholar. Whereas the decadent philosopher has always been
reckoned hitherto as the typical philosopher.

Among philosophers, nothing is more rare than intellectual
uprightness: they perhaps say the very reverse, and even believe it.
But the prerequisite of all their work is, that they can only admit
of certain truths; they know what they have to prove; and the fact
that they must be agreed as to these "truths" is almost what makes them
recognise one another as philosophers. There are, for instance, the
truths of morality. But belief in morality is not a proof of morality:
there are cases--and the philosopher's case is one in point--when a
belief of this sort is simply a piece of immorality.

What is the retrograde factor in a philosopher?--He teaches that
the qualities which he happens to possess are the only qualities that
exist, that they are indispensable to those who wish to attain to the
"highest good" (for instance, dialectics with Plato). He would have
all men raise themselves, gradatim, to his type as the highest. He
despises what is generally esteemed--by him a gulf is cleft between
the highest priestly values and the values of the world. He knows
what is true, who God is, what every one's goal should be, and the way
thereto.... The typical philosopher is thus an absolute dogmatist;--if
he requires scepticism at all it is only in order to be able to speak
dogmatically of his principal purpose.

When the philosopher is confronted with his rival--science, for
instance, he becomes a sceptic; then he appropriates a form of
knowledge which he denies to the man of science; he goes hand in
hand with the priest so that he may not be suspected of atheism or
materialism; he considers an attack made upon himself as an attack
upon morals, religion, virtue, and order--he knows how to bring his
opponents into ill repute by calling them "seducers" and "underminers":
then he marches shoulder to shoulder with power.

The philosopher at war with other philosophers:--he does his best
to compel them to appear like anarchists, disbelievers, opponents of
authority. In short, when he fights, he fights exactly like a priest
and like the priesthood.

THE TRUTHS AND ERRORS OF PHILOSOPHERS.

Philosophy defined by Kant: "The science of the limitations of
reason"!!

According to Aristotle, Philosophy is the art of discovering truth. On
the other hand, the Epicurians, who availed themselves of Aristotle's
sensual theory of knowledge, retorted in ironical opposition to the
search for truth: "Philosophy is the art of Life."

The three great naivetes:--

Knowledge as a means of happiness (as if ...);

Knowledge as a means to virtue (as if ...);

Knowledge as a means to the "denial of Life"--inasmuch as it leads to
disappointment--(as if ...).

As if there were a "truth" which one could by some means approach!

Error and ignorance are fatal.--The assumption that truth has been
found and that ignorance and error are at an end, constitutes one
of the most seductive thoughts in the world. Granted that it be
generally accepted, it paralyses the will to test, to investigate,
to be cautious, and to gather experience: it may even be regarded as
criminal--that is to say, as a doubt concerning truth....

"Truth" is therefore more fatal than error and ignorance, because it
paralyses the forces which lead to enlightenment and knowledge. The
passion for idleness now stands up for "truth" ("Thought is pain
and misery!"), as also do order, rule, the joy of possession, the
pride of wisdom--in fact, vanity.--it is easier to obey than to
examine; it is more gratifying to think "I possess the truth," than
to see only darkness in all directions; ... but, above all, it is
reassuring, it lends confidence, and alleviates life--it "improves"
the character inasmuch as it reduces mistrust." Spiritual peace," "a
quiet conscience"--these things are inventions which are only possible
provided "Truth be found."--"By their fruits ye shall know them." ...
"Truth" is the truth because it makes men better.... The process goes
on: all goodness and all success is placed to the credit of "truth."

This is the proof by success: the happiness, contentment, and the
welfare of a community or of an individual, are now understood to be
the result of the belief in morality.... Conversely: failure is
ascribed to a lack of faith.

The causes of error lie just as much in the good as in the bad will
of man:--in an incalculable number of cases he conceals reality from
himself, he falsifies it, so that he may not suffer from his good or
bad will. God, for instance, is considered the shaper of man's destiny;
he interprets his little lot as though everything were intentionally
sent to him for the salvation of his soul,--this act of ignorance in
"philology," which to a more subtle intellect would seem unclean and
false, is done, in the majority of cases, with perfect good faith.
Goodwill, "noble feelings," and "lofty states of the soul" are just as
underhand and deceptive in the means they use as are the passions love,
hatred, and revenge, which morality has repudiated and declared to be
egotistic.

Errors are what mankind has had to pay for most dearly: and taking them
all in all, the errors which have resulted from goodwill are those
which have wrought the most harm. The illusion which makes people
happy is more harmful than the illusion which is immediately followed
by evil results: the latter increases keenness and mistrust, and
purifies, the understanding; the former merely narcoticises....

Fine feelings and noble impulses ought, speaking physiologically, to be
classified with the narcotics: their abuse is followed by precisely the
same results as the abuse of any other opiate--weak nerves.

Error is the most expensive luxury that man can indulge in: and if the
error happen to be a physiological one, it is fatal to life. What has
mankind paid for most dearly hitherto? For its "truths ": for every one
of these were errors in physiologicis>....

Psychological confusions: the desire for belief is confounded with
the "will to truth" (for instance, in Carlyle). But the desire for
disbelief has also been confounded with the "will to truth" (a need of
ridding one's self of a belief for a hundred reasons: in order to carry
one's point against certain "believers"). What is it that inspires
Sceptics? The hatred of dogmatists--or a need of repose, weariness as
in Pyrrho's case.

The advantages which were expected to come from truth, were the
advantages resulting from a belief in it: for, in itself, truth could
have been thoroughly painful, harmful, and even fatal. Likewise truth
was combated only on account of the advantages which a victory over it
would provide--for instance, emancipation from the yoke of the ruling
powers.

The method of truth was not based upon motives of truthfulness, but
upon motives of power, upon the desire to be superior.

How is truth proved? By means of the feeling of increased
power,--by means of utility,--by means of indispensability,--in short,
by means of its advantages (that is to say, hypotheses concerning what
truth should be like in order that it may be embraced by us). But this
involves prejudice: it is a sign that truth does not enter the
question at all....

What is the meaning of the "will to truth," for instance in the
Goncourts? and in the naturalists?--A criticism of "objectivity."

Why should we know: why should we not prefer to be deceived?...
But what was needed was always belief--and not truth.... Belief
is created by means which are quite opposed to the method of
investigation: it even depends upon the exclusion of the latter.

A certain degree of faith suffices to-day to give us an objection
to what is believed--it does more, it makes us question the spiritual
healthiness of the believer.

Martyrs.--To combat anything that is based upon reverence, opponents
must be possessed of both daring and recklessness, and be hindered
by no scruples.... Now, if one considers that for thousands of
years man has sanctified as truths only those things which were in
reality errors, and that he has branded any criticism of them with
the hall-mark of badness, one will have to acknowledge, however
reluctantly, that a goodly amount of immoral deeds were necessary in
order to give the initiative to an attack--I mean to reason.... That
these immoralists have always posed as the "martyrs of truth" should
be forgiven them: the truth of the matter is that they did not stand
up and deny owing to an instinct for truth; but because of a love of
dissolution, criminal scepticism, and the love of adventure. In other
cases it is personal rancour which drives them into the province of
problems--they only combat certain points of view in order to be
able to carry their point against certain people. But, above all, it
is revenge which has become scientifically useful--the revenge of the
oppressed, those who, thanks to the truth that happens to be ruling,
have been pressed aside and even smothered....

Truth, that is to say the scientific method, was grasped and favoured
by such as recognised that it was a useful weapon of war--an instrument
of destruction....

In order to be honoured as opponents, they were moreover obliged
to use an apparatus similar to that used by those whom they were
attacking: they therefore brandished the concept "truth" as absolutely
as their adversaries did--they became fanatics at least in their
poses, because no other pose could be expected to be taken seriously.
What still remained to be done was left to persecution, to passion,
and the uncertainty of the persecuted--hatred waxed great, and the
first impulse began to die away and to leave the field entirely to
science. Ultimately all of them wanted to be right in the same absurd
way as their opponents.... The word "conviction," "faith," the pride
of martyrdom--these things are most unfavourable to knowledge. The
adversaries of truth finally adopt the whole subjective manner of
deciding about truth,--that is to say, by means of poses, sacrifices,
and heroic resolutions,--and thus prolong the dominion of the
anti-scientific method. As martyrs they compromise their very own deed.

The dangerous distinction between "theoretical" and "practical" in
Kant for instance, but also in the ancient philosophers:--they behave
as if pure intellectuality presented them with the problems of science
and metaphysics;--they behave as if practice should be judged by a
measure of its own, whatever the judgment of theory may be.

Against the first tendency I set up my psychology of philosophers:
their strangest calculations and "intellectuality" are still but the
last pallid impress of a physiological fact; spontaneity is absolutely
lacking in them, everything is instinct, everything is intended to
follow a certain direction from the first....

Against the second tendency I put my question: whether we know another
method of acting correctly, besides that of thinking correctly;
the last case is action, the first presupposes thought Are we
possessed of a means whereby we can judge of the value of a method
of life differently from the value of a theory: through induction or
comparison?... Guileless people imagine that in this respect we are
better equipped, we know what is "good"--and the philosophers are
content to repeat this view. We conclude that some sort of faith is
at work in this matter, and nothing more....

"Men must act; consequently rules of conduct are necessary"--this is
what even the ancient Sceptics thought. The urgent need of a definite
decision in this department of knowledge is used as an argument in
favour of regarding something as true!...

"Men must not act"--said their more consistent brothers, the Buddhists,
and then thought out a mode of conduct which would deliver man from the
yoke of action....

To adapt one's self, to live as the "common man" lives, and to regard
as right and proper what he regards as right: this is submission to
the gregarious instinct. One must carry one's courage and severity
so far as to learn to consider such submission a disgrace. One should
not live according to two standards!... One should not separate theory
and practice!...

Of all that which was formerly held to be true, not one word is to be
credited. Everything which was formerly disdained as unholy, forbidden,
contemptible, and fatal--all these flowers now bloom on the most
charming paths of truth.

The whole of this old morality concerns us no longer: it contains not
one idea which is still worthy of respect. We have outlived it--we
are no longer sufficiently coarse and guileless to be forced to allow
ourselves to be lied to in this way.... In more polite language: we are
too virtuous for it.... And if truth in the old sense were "true" only
because the old morality said "yea" to it, and had a right to say
"yea" to it: it follows that no truth of the past can any longer be of
use to us.... Our criterion of truth is /certainly not morality: we
refute an assertion when we show that it is dependent upon morality
and is inspired by noble feelings.

All these values are empirical and conditioned. But he who believes
in them and who honours them, refuses to acknowledge this aspect of
them. All philosophers believe in these values, and one form their
reverence takes is the endeavour to make a priori truths out of them.
The falsifying nature of reverence....

Reverence is the supreme test of intellectual honesty, but in the
whole history of philosophy there is no such thing as intellectual
honesty,--but the "love of goodness ..."

On the one hand, there is an absolute lack of method in testing the
value of these values; secondly, there is a general disinclination
either to test them or to regard them as conditioned at all.--All
anti-scientific instincts assembled round moral values in order to
keep science out of this department....

CONCLUDING REMARKS IN THE CRITICISM OF PHILOSOPHY.

Why philosophers are slanderers.--The artful and blind hostility
of philosophers towards the senses--what an amount of mob and
middle-class qualities lie in all this hatred!

The crowd always believes that an abuse of which it feels the harmful
results, constitutes an objection to the thing which happens to be
abused: all insurrectionary movements against principles, whether in
politics or agriculture, always follow a line of argument suggested by
this ulterior motive: the abuse must be shown to be necessary to, and,
inherent in, the principle.

It is a woeful history: mankind looks for a principle, from the
standpoint of which he will be able to contemn man--he invents a world
in order to be able to slander and throw mud at this world: as a matter
of fact, he snatches every time at nothing, and construes this nothing
as "God," as "Truth," and, in any case, as judge and detractor of
this existence....

If one should require a proof of how deeply and thoroughly the actually
barbarous needs of man, even in his present state of tameness and
"civilisation," still seek gratification, one should contemplate the
"leitmotifs" of the whole of the evolution of philosophy:--a sort
of revenge upon reality, a surreptitious process of destroying the
values by means of which men live, a dissatisfied soul to which
the conditions of discipline is one of torture, and which takes a
particular pleasure in morbidly severing all the bonds that bind it to
such a condition.

The history of philosophy is the story of a secret and mad hatred
of the prerequisities of Life, of the feelings which make for the
real values of Life, and of all partisanship in favour of Life.
Philosophers have never hesitated to affirm a fanciful world, provided
it contradicted this world, and furnished them with a weapon wherewith
they could calumniate this world. Up to the present, philosophy has
been the grand school of slander: and its power has been so great,
that even to-day our science, which pretends to be the advocate of
Life, has accepted the fundamental position of slander, and treats
this world as "appearance," and this chain of causes as though it were
only phenomenal. What is the hatred which is active here?

I fear that it is still the Circe of philosophers--Morality, which
plays them the trick of compelling them to be ever slanderers.... They
believed in moral "truths," in these they thought they had found the
highest values; what alternative had they left, save that of denying
existence ever more emphatically the more they got to know about it?...
For this life is immoral.... And it is based upon immoral first
principles: and morality says nay to Life.

Let us suppress the real world: and in order to do this, we must first
suppress the highest values current hitherto--morals.... It is enough
to show that morality itself is immoral, in the same sense as that in
which immorality has been condemned heretofore. If an end be thus made
to the tyranny of the former values, if we have suppressed the "real
world," a new order of values must follow of its own accord.

The world of appearance and the world of lies: this constitutes the
contradiction. The latter hitherto has been the "real world," "truth,"
"God." This is the one which we still have to suppress.

The logic of my conception:

Morality as the highest value (it is master of all the phases
of philosophy, even of the Sceptics). Result: this world is no good,
it is not the "real world."

What is it that determines the highest value here? What, in
sooth, is morality?--It is the instinct of decadence; it is the
means whereby the exhausted and the degenerate revenge themselves.
Historical proof: philosophers have always been decadents ... in the
service of nihilistic religions.

It is the instinct of decadence coming to the fore as will to
power. Proof: the absolute immorality of the means employed by
morality throughout its history.

General aspect: the values which have been highest hitherto constitute
a specific case of the will to power; morality itself is a specific
case of immorality.

The principal innovations: Instead of "moral values," nothing but
naturalistic values. Naturalisation of morality.

In the place of "sociology," a doctrine of the forms of dominion.

In the place of "society," the complex whole of culture, which is
my chief interest (whether in its entirety or in parts).

In the place of the "theory of knowledge," a doctrine which laid down
the value of the passions (to this a hierarchy of the passions would
belong: the passions transfigured; their superior rank, their
"spirituality").

In the place of "metaphysics" and religion, the doctrine of Eternal
Recurrence (this being regarded as a means to the breeding and
selection of men).

My precursors: Schopenhauer. To what extent I deepened pessimism, and
first brought its full meaning within my grasp, by means of its most
extreme opposite.

Likewise: the higher Europeans, the pioneers of great politics.

Likewise: the Greeks and their genesis.

I have named those who were unconsciously my workers and precursors.
But in what direction may I turn with any hope of finding my particular
kind of philosophers themselves, or at least my yearning for new
philosophers? In that direction, alone, where a noble attitude of
mind prevails, an attitude of mind which believes in slavery and in
manifold orders of rank, as the prerequisites of any high degree of
culture. In that direction, alone, where a creative attitude of
mind prevails, an attitude of mind which does not regard the world
of happiness and repose, the "Sabbath of Sabbaths" as an end to be
desired, and which, even in peace, honours the means which lead to new
wars; an attitude of mind which would prescribe laws for the future,
which for the sake of the future would treat everything that exists
to-day with harshness and even tyranny; a daring and "immoral" attitude
of mind, which would wish to see both the good and the evil qualities
in man developed to their fullest extent, because it would feel itself
able to put each in its right place--that is to say, in that place in
which each would need the other. But what prospect has he of finding
what he seeks, who goes in search of philosophers to-day? Is it not
probable that, even with the best Diogenes-lantern in his hand, he will
wander about by night and day in vain? This age is possessed of the
opposite instincts. What it wants, above all, is comfort; secondly,
it wants publicity and the deafening din of actors' voices, the big
drum which appeals to its Bank-Holiday tastes; thirdly, that every
one should lie on his belly in utter subjection before the greatest
of all lies--which is "the equality of men"--and should honour only
those virtues which make men equal and place them in equal positions.
But in this way, the rise of the philosopher, as I understand him, is
made completely impossible--despite the fact that many may regard the
present tendencies as rather favourable to his advent. As a matter of
fact, the whole world mourns, to-day, the hard times that philosophers
used to have, hemmed in between the fear of the stake, a guilty
conscience, and the presumptuous wisdom of the Fathers of the Church:
but the truth is, that precisely these conditions were ever so much
more favourable to the education of a mighty, extensive, subtle,
rash, and daring intellect than the conditions prevailing to-day. At
present another kind of intellect, the intellect of the demagogue, of
the actor, and perhaps of the beaver- and ant-like scholar too, finds
the best possible conditions for its development. But even for artists
of a superior calibre the conditions are already far from favourable:
for does not every one of them, almost, perish owing to his want of
discipline? They are no longer tyrannised over by an outside power--by
the tables of absolute values enforced by a Church or by a monarch:
and thus they no longer learn to develop their "inner tyrant," their
will. And what holds good of artists also holds good, to a greater
and more fatal degree, of philosophers. Where, then, are free spirits
to be found to-day? Let any one show me a free spirit to-day!

Under "Spiritual freedom" I understand something very definite: it is
a state in which one is a hundred times superior to philosophers and
other disciples of "truth" in one's severity towards one's self, in
one's uprightness, in one's courage, and in one's absolute will to say
nay even when it is dangerous to say nay. I regard the philosophers
that have appeared heretofore as contemptible libertines hiding
behind the petticoats of the female "Truth."

The distinguishing feature of our nineteenth century is not the triumph
of science, but the triumph of the scientific method over science.

The history of scientific methods was regarded by Auguste Comte
almost as philosophy itself.

The great Methodologists: Aristotle, Bacon, Descartes, Auguste Comte.

The most valuable knowledge is always discovered last: but the most
valuable knowledge consists of methods.

All methods, all the hypotheses on which the science of our day
depends, were treated with the profoundest contempt for centuries:
on their account a man used to be banished from the society of
respectable people--he was held to be an "enemy of God," a reviler
of the highest ideal, a madman.

We had the whole pathos of mankind against us,--our notion of what
"truth" ought to be, of what the service of truth ought to be, our
objectivity, our method, our calm, cautious and distrustful manner were
altogether despicable.... At bottom, that which has kept men back
most, is an aesthetic taste: they believed in the picturesque effect of
truth; what they demanded of the scientist was, that he should make a
strong appeal to their imagination.

From the above, it would almost seem as if the very reverse had been
achieved, as if a sudden jump had been made: as a matter of fact, the
schooling which the moral hyperboles afforded, gradually prepared the
way for that milder form of pathos which at last became incarnate in
the scientific man....

Conscientiousness in small things, the self-control of the religious
man, was a preparatory school for the scientific character, as was
also, in a very pre-eminent sense, the attitude of mind which makes a
man take problems seriously, irrespective of what personal advantage
he may derive from them....

The Starting-point of Epistemology.

Profound disinclination to halt once and for all at any collective view
of the world. The charm of the opposite point of view: the refusal to
relinquish the stimulus residing in the enigmatical.

The hypothesis that, at bottom, things proceed in such a moral fashion
that human reason must be right, is a mere piece of good-natured
and simple-minded trustfulness, the result of the belief in Divine
truthfulness--God regarded as the Creator of all things.--These
concepts are our inheritance from a former existence in a Beyond.

The contradiction of the so-called "facts of consciousness."
Observation a thousand times more difficult, error is perhaps the
absolute condition of observation.

The intellect cannot criticise itself, simply because it can be
compared with no other kind of intellect, and also because its ability
to know would only reveal itself in the presence of "actual reality";
that is to say, because, in order to criticise the intellect, we should
have to be higher creatures with "absolute knowledge." This would
presuppose the existence of something, a "thing-in-itself," apart
from all the perspective kinds of observation and senso-spiritual
perception. But the psychological origin of the belief in things,
forbids our speaking of "things in themselves."

The idea that a sort of adequate relation exists between subject and
object, that the object is something which when seen from inside
would be a subject, is a well-meant invention which, I believe, has
seen its best days. The measure of that which we are conscious of, is
perforce entirely dependent upon the coarse utility of the function of
consciousness: how could this little garret-prospect of consciousness
warrant our asserting anything in regard to "subject" and "object,"
which would bear any relation to reality!

Criticism of modern philosophy: erroneous starting-point, as if there
were such things as "facts of consciousness"--and no phenomenalism in
introspection.

"Consciousness"--to what extent is the idea which is thought of, the
idea of will, or the idea of a feeling (which is known by us alone),
quite superficial? Our inner world is also "appearance."

I am convinced of the phenomenalism of the inner world also:
everything that reaches our consciousness is utterly and completely
adjusted, simplified, schematised, interpreted, the actual process
of inner "perception," the relation of causes between thoughts,
feelings, desires, between subject and object, is absolutely concealed
from us, and may be purely imaginary. This "inner world of
appearance" is treated with precisely the same forms and procedures as
the "outer" world. We never come across a single "fact": pleasure and
pain are more recently evolved intellectual phenomena....

Causality evades us; to assume the existence of an immediate causal
relation between thoughts, as Logic does, is the result of the coarsest
and most clumsy observation. There are all sorts of passions that may
intervene between two thoughts: but the interaction is too rapid--that
is why we fail to recognise them, that is why we actually deny
their existence....

"Thinking," as the epistemologists understand \r it, never takes
place at all: it is an absolutely gratuitous fabrication, arrived at
by selecting one element from the process and by eliminating all the
rest--an artificial adjustment for the purpose of the understanding....

The "mind," something that thinks: at times, even, "the mind absolute
and pure"--this concept is an evolved and second result of false
introspection, which believes in "thinking": in the first place an act
is imagined here which does not really occur at all, i.e. "thinking";
and, secondly, a subject-substratum is imagined in which every
process of this thinking has its origin, and nothing else--that is to
say, both the action and the agent are fanciful.

Phenomenalism must not be sought in the wrong quarter: nothing is more
phenomenal, or, to be more precise, nothing is so much deception, as
this inner world, which we observe with the "inner sense."

Our belief that the will is a cause was so great, that, according to
our personal experiences in general, we projected a cause into all
phenomena (i.e. a certain motive is posited as the cause of all
phenomena).

We believe that the thoughts which follow one upon the other in our
minds are linked by some sort of causal relation: the logician, more
especially, who actually speaks of a host of facts which have never
once been seen in reality, has grown accustomed to the prejudice that
thoughts are the cause of thoughts.

We believe--and even our philosophers believe it still--that pleasure
and pain are the causes of reactions, that the very purpose of pleasure
and pain is to occasion reactions. For hundreds of years, pleasure and
pain have been represented as the motives for every action. Upon
reflection, however, we are bound to concede that everything would have
proceeded in exactly the same way, according to precisely the same
sequence of cause and effect, if the states "pleasure" and "pain" had
been entirely absent; and that we are simply deceived when we believe
that they actually cause anything:--they are the attendant phenomena,
and they have quite a different purpose from that of provoking
reactions; they are in themselves effects involved in the process of
reaction which takes place.

In short: Everything that becomes conscious is a final phenomenon, a
conclusion--and is the cause of nothing; all succession of phenomena
in consciousness is absolutely atomistic.--And we tried to understand
the universe from the opposite point of view--as if nothing were
effective or real, save thinking, feeling, willing! ...

The phenomenalism of the "inner world!" A chronological inversion
takes place, so that the cause reaches consciousness as the
effect.--We know that pain is projected into a certain part of the
body although it is not really situated there; we have learnt that all
sensations which were ingenuously supposed to be conditioned by the
outer world are, as a matter of fact, conditioned by the inner world:
that the real action of the outer world never takes place in a way of
which we can become conscious.... That fragment of the outer world of
which we become conscious, is born after the effect produced by the
outer world has been recorded, and is subsequently interpreted as the
"cause" of that effect....

In the phenomenalism of the "inner world," the chronological order
of cause and effect is inverted. The fundamental fact of "inner
experience" is, that the cause is imagined after the effect has been
recorded.... The same holds good of the sequence of thoughts: we seek
for the reason of a thought, before it has reached our consciousness;
and then the reason reaches consciousness first, whereupon follows
its effect. All our dreams are the interpretation of our collective
feelings with the view of discovering the possible causes of the
latter; and the process is such that a condition only becomes
conscious, when the supposed causal link has reached consciousness.[1]

The whole of "inner experience" is founded on this: that a cause is
sought and imagined which accounts for a certain irritation in our
nerve-centres, and that it is only the cause which is found in this way
which reaches consciousness; this cause may have absolutely nothing to
do with the real cause--it is a sort of groping assisted by former
"inner experiences," that is to say, by memory. The memory, however,
retains the habit of old interpretations,--that is to say, of erroneous
causality,--so that "inner experience" comprises in itself all the
results of former erroneous fabrications of causes. Our "outside
world," as we conceive it every instant, is indissolubly bound up with
the old error of cause: we interpret by means of the schematism of
"the thing," etc.

"Inner experience" only enters consciousness when it has found a
language which the individual can understand--that is to say, a
translation of a certain condition into conditions with which he is
familiar; "understand" means simply this: to be able to express
something new in the terms of something old or familiar. For instance,
"I feel unwell"--a judgment of this sort presupposes a very great and
recent neutrality on the part of the observer: the simple man always
says, "This and that make me feel unwell,"--he begins to be clear
concerning his indisposition only after he has discovered a reason for
it.... This is what I call a lack of philological knowledge; to be
able to read a text, as such, without reading an interpretation into
it, is the latest form of "inner experience,"--it is perhaps a barely
possible form....

[Footnote 1: When in our dream we hear a bell ringing, or a tapping at
our door, we scarcely ever wake before having already accounted for the
sound, in the terms of the dream-world we were in.--TR.]

There are no such things as "mind," reason, thought, consciousness,
soul, will, or truth: they all belong to fiction, and can serve no
purpose. It is not a question of "subject and object," but of a
particular species of animal which can prosper only by means of a
certain exactness, or, better still, regularity in recording its
perceptions (in order that experience may be capitalised)....

Knowledge works as an instrument of power. It is therefore obvious
that it increases with each advance of power....

The purpose of knowledge: in this case, as in the case of "good" or
"beautiful," the concept must be regarded strictly and narrowly from an
anthropocentric and biological standpoint. In order that a particular
species may maintain and increase its power, its conception of reality
must contain enough which is calculable and constant to allow of its
formulating a scheme of conduct. The utility of preservation--and
not some abstract or theoretical need to eschew deception--stands as
the motive force behind the development of the organs of knowledge; ...
they evolve in such a way that their observations may suffice for our
preservation. In other words, the measure of the desire for knowledge
depends upon the extent to which the Will to Power grows in a certain
species: a species gets a grasp of a given amount of reality, in order
to master it, in order to enlist that amount in its service.

The Belief in the "Ego." Subject.

In opposition to Positivism, which halts at phenomena and says,
"These are only facts and nothing more," I would say: No,
facts are precisely what is lacking, all that exists consists of
interpretations. We cannot establish any fact "in itself": it
may even be nonsense to desire to do such a thing. "Everything is
subjective," ye say: but that in itself is interpretation. The
subject is nothing given, but something superimposed by fancy,
something introduced behind.--Is it necessary to set an interpreter
behind the interpretation already to hand? Even that would be fantasy,
hypothesis.

To the extent to which knowledge has any sense at all, the world is
knowable: but it may be interpreted differently, it has not one sense
behind it, but hundreds of senses.--"Perspectivity."

It is our needs that interpret the world; our instincts and their
impulses for and against. Every instinct is a sort of thirst for power;
each has its point of view, which it would fain impose upon all the
other instincts as their norm.

Where our ignorance really begins, at that point from which we can see
no further, we set a word; for instance, the word "I," the word "do,"
the word "suffer"--these concepts may be the horizon lines of our
knowledge, but they are not "truths."

Owing to the phenomenon "thought," the ego is taken for granted; but
up to the present everybody believed, like the people, that there
was something unconditionally certain in the notion "I think," and
that by analogy with our understanding of all other causal reactions
this "I" was the given cause of the thinking. However customary
and indispensable this fiction may have become now, this fact proves
nothing against the imaginary nature of its origin; it might be a
life-preserving belief and still be false.

"Something is thought, therefore there is something that thinks": this
is what Descartes' argument amounts to. But this is tantamount to
considering our belief in the notion "substance" as an "a priori"
truth:--that there must be something "that thinks" when we think, is
merely a formulation of a grammatical custom which sets an agent to
every action. In short, a metaphysico-logical postulate is already put
forward here--and it is not merely an ascertainment of fact.... On
Descartes' lines nothing absolutely certain is attained, but only the
fact of a very powerful faith.

If the proposition be reduced to "Something is thought, therefore there
are thoughts," the result is mere tautology; and precisely the one
factor which is in question, the "reality of thought," is not touched
upon,--so that, in this form, the apparitional character of thought
cannot be denied. What Descartes wanted to prove was, that thought
not only had apparent reality, but absolute reality.

The concept substance is an outcome of the concept subject, and not
conversely! If we surrender the concept soul, the subject, the very
conditions for the concept "substance" are lacking. Degrees of Being
are obtained, but Being is lost.

Criticism of "reality": what does a "plus or minus of reality" lead
to, the gradation of Being in which we believe?

The degree of our feeling of life and power (the logic and
relationship of past life) presents us with the measure of "Being,"
"reality," "non-appearance."

Subject i this is the term we apply to our belief in an entity
underlying all the different moments of the most intense sensations
of reality; we regard this belief as the effect of a cause,--and we
believe in our belief to such an extent that, on its account alone,
we imagine "truth," "reality," "substantiality."--a "Subject" is the
fiction which would fain make us believe that several similar states
were the effect of one substratum: but we it was who first created
the "similarity" of these states; the similising and adjusting of them
is the fact--not their similarity (on the contrary, this ought rather
to be denied).

One would have to know what Being is, in order to be able to
decide whether this or that is real (for instance, "the facts of
consciousness"); it would also be necessary to know what certainty
and knowledge are, and so forth.--But, as we do not know these
things, a criticism of the faculty of knowledge is nonsensical: how is
it possible for an instrument to criticise itself, when it is itself
that exercises the critical faculty. It cannot even define itself!

Should not all philosophy ultimately disclose the first principles on
which the reasoning processes depend?--that is to say, our belief
in the "ego" as a substance, as the only reality according to which,
alone, we are able to ascribe reality to things? The oldest realism
at length comes to light, simultaneously with man's recognition of
the fact that his whole religious history is no more than a history
of soul-superstitions. Here there is a barrier; our very thinking,
itself, involves that belief (with its distinctions--substance,
accident, action, agent, etc.); to abandon it would mean to cease from
being able to think.

But that a belief, however useful it may be for the preservation of a
species, has nothing to do with the truth, may be seen from the fact
that we must believe in time, space, and motion, without feeling
ourselves compelled to regard them as absolute realities.

The psychological origin of our belief in reason.--The ideas
"reality," "Being," are derived from our subject-feeling.

"Subject," interpreted through ourselves so that the ego may stand as
substance, as the cause of action, as the agent.

The metaphysico-logical postulates, the belief in substance, accident,
attribute, etc. etc., draws its convincing character from our habit of
regarding all our actions as the result of our will: so that the ego,
as substance, does not vanish in the multiplicity of changes.--But
there is no such thing as will. We have no categories which allow
us to separate a "world as thing-in-itself," from "a world of
appearance." All our categories of reason have a sensual origin: they
are deductions from the empirical world. "The soul," "the ego"--the
history of these concepts shows that here, also, the oldest distinction
("spiritus," "life") obtains....

If there is nothing material, then there can be nothing immaterial. The
concept no longer means anything.

No subject-"atoms." The sphere of a subject increasing or
diminishing unremittingly, the centre of the system continually
displacing itself, in the event of the system no longer being able
to organise the appropriated mass, it divides into two. On the other
hand, it is able, without destroying it, to transform a weaker subject
into one of its own functionaries, and, to a certain extent, to compose
a new entity with it. Not a "substance," but rather something which in
itself strives after greater strength; and which wishes to "preserve"
itself only indirectly (it wishes to surpass itself).

Everything that reaches consciousness as an entity is already
enormously complicated: we never have anything more than the semblance
of an entity.

The phenomenon of the body is the richer, more distinct, and more
tangible phenomenon: it should be methodically drawn to the front, and
no mention should be made of its ultimate significance.

The assumption of a single subject is perhaps not necessary, it
may be equally permissible to assume a plurality of subjects, whose
interaction and struggle lie at the bottom of our thought and our
consciousness in general. A sort of aristocracy of "cells" in which
the ruling power is vested? Of course an aristocracy of equals, who are
accustomed to ruling co-operatively, and understand how to command?

My hypotheses. The subject as a plurality. Pain intellectual and
dependent upon the judgment harmful, projected. The effect always
"unconscious": the inferred and imagined cause is projected, it
follows the event. Pleasure is a form of pain. The only kind of power
that exists is of the same nature as the power of will: a commanding
of other subjects which thereupon alter themselves. The unremitting
transientness and volatility of the subject. "Mortal soul." Number as
perspective form.

The belief in the body is more fundamental than the belief in the soul:
the latter arose from the unscientific observation of the agonies
of the body. (Something which leaves it. The belief in the truth of
dreams)

The body and physiology the starting-point: why?--We obtain a correct
image of the nature of our subject-entity, that is to say, as a
number of regents at the head of a community (not as "souls" or as
"life-forces") as also of the dependence of these regents upon their
subjects, and upon the conditions of a hierarchy, and of the division
of labour, as the means ensuring the existence of the part and the
whole. We also obtain a correct image of the way in which the living
entities continually come into being and expire, and we see how
eternity cannot belong to the "subject"; we realise that the struggle
finds expression in obeying as well as in commanding, and that a
fluctuating definition of the limits of power is a factor of life. The
comparative ignorance in which the ruler is kept, of the individual
performances and even disturbances taking place in the community,
also belong to the conditions under which government may be carried
on. In short, we obtain a valuation even of want-of-knowledge,
of seeing-things-generally-as-a-whole, of simplification, of
falsification, and of perspective. What is most important, however,
is, that we regard the ruler and his subjects as of the same kind,
all feeling, willing, thinking--and that wherever we see or suspect
movement in a body, we conclude that there is co-operative-subjective
and invisible life. Movement as a symbol for the eye; it denotes that
something has been felt, willed, thought.

The danger of directly questioning the subject concerning the
subject, and all spiritual self-reflection, consists in this, that it
might be a necessary condition of its activity to interpret itself
erroneously. That is why we appeal to the body and lay the evidence
of sharpened senses aside: or we try and see whether the subjects
themselves cannot enter into communication with us.

Biology of the Instinct of Knowledge. Perspectivity.

Truth is that kind of error without which a certain species of living
being cannot exist. The value for Life is ultimately decisive.

It is unlikely that our "knowledge" extends farther than is exactly
necessary for our self-preservation. Morphology shows us how the
senses and the nerves as well as the brain evolve in proportion as the
difficulties of acquiring sustenance increase.

If the morality of "Thou shalt not lie" be refuted, the sense for truth
will then have to justify itself before another tribunal--as a means
to the preservation of man, as Will to Power.

Likewise our love of the beautiful: it is also the creative will.
Both senses stand side by side; the sense of truth is the means
wherewith the power is appropriated to adjust things according to one's
taste. The love of adjusting and reforming--a primeval love! We can
only take cognisance of a world which we ourselves have made.

Concerning the multifariousness of knowledge. The tracing of its
relation to many other things (or the relation of kind)--how should
"knowledge" be of another? The way to know and to investigate is in
itself among the conditions of life; that is why the conclusion that
there could be no other kind of intellect (for ourselves) than the kind
which serves the purpose of our preservation is an excessively hasty
one: this actual condition may be only an accidental, not in the
least an essential; one.

Our apparatus for acquiring knowledge is not adjusted for knowledge.

The most strongly credited a priori "truths" are, to my mind, mere
assumptions pending further investigation; for instance, the law
of causation is a belief so thoroughly acquired by practice and so
completely assimilated, that to disbelieve in it would mean the ruin of
our kind. But is it therefore true? What an extraordinary conclusion!
As if truth were proved by the mere fact that man survives!

To what extent is our intellect also a result of the conditions of
life?--We should not have it did we not need to have it, and we
should not have it as we have it, if we did not need it as we need
it--that is to say, if we could live otherwise.

Thinking in a primitive (inorganic) state is to persevere in forms,
as in the case of the crystal.--In our thought, the essential
factor is the harmonising of the new material with the old schemes (=
Procrustes' bed), the assimilation of the unfamiliar.

The perception of the senses projected outwards: "inwards" and
"outwards"--does the body command here?

The same equalising and ordering power which rules in the idioplasma,
also rules in the incorporation of the outer world: our sensual
perceptions are already the result of this process of adaptation
and harmonisation in regard to all the past in us; they do not
follow directly upon the "impression."

All thought, judgment, perception, regarded as an act of comparing[2]
has as a first condition the act of equalising, and earlier still the
act of "making equal." The process of making equal is the same as the
assimilation by the amoeba of the nutritive matter it appropriates.

"Memory" late, in so far as the equalising instinct appears to have
been subdued: the difference is preserved. Memory--a process of
classification and collocation; active--who?

[Footnote 2: The German word vergleichen, meaning "to compare,"
contains the root "equal" (gleich) which cannot be rendered in
English. TR.]

In regard to the memory, we must unlearn a great deal: here we meet
with the greatest temptation to assume the existence of a "soul,"
which, irrespective of time, reproduces and recognises again and again,
etc. What I have experienced, however, continues to live "in the
memory"; I have nothing to do with it when memory "comes," my will is
inactive in regard to it, as in the case of the coming and going of a
thought. Something happens, of which I become conscious: now something
similar comes--who has called it forth? Who has awakened it?

The whole apparatus of knowledge is an abstracting and simplifying
apparatus--not directed at knowledge, but at the appropriation of
things: "end" and "means" are as remote from the essence of this
apparatus as "concepts" are. By the "end" and the "means" a process is
appropriated (--a process is invented which may be grasped), but by
"concepts" one appropriates the "things" which constitute the process.

Consciousness begins outwardly as co-ordination and knowledge of
impressions,--at first it is at the point which is remotest from the
biological centre of the individual; but it is a process which deepens
and which tends to become more and more an inner function, continually
approaching nearer to the centre.

Our perceptions, as we understand them--that is to say, the sum of all
those perceptions the consciousness whereof was useful and essential
to us and to the whole organic processes which preceded us: therefore
they do not include all perceptions (for instance, not the electrical
ones);--that is to say, we have senses only for a definite selection
of perceptions--such perceptions as concern us with a view to our
self-preservation. Consciousness extends so far only as it is useful.
There can be no doubt that all our sense-perceptions are entirely
permeated by valuations (useful or harmful--consequently, pleasant or
painful). Every particular colour; besides being a colour, expresses a
value to us (although we seldom admit it, or do so only after it has
affected us exclusively for a long time, as in the case of convicts
in gaol or lunatics). Insects likewise react in different ways to
different colours: some like this shade, the others that. Ants are a
case in point.

In the beginning images how images originate in the mind must be
explained. Then words, applied to images. Finally concepts,
possible only when there are words--the assembling of several pictures
into a whole which is not for the eye but for the ear (word). The
small amount of emotion which the "word" generates,--that is, then,
which the view of the similar pictures generates, for which one word
is used,--this simple emotion is the common factor, the basis of a
concept. That weak feelings should all be regarded as alike, as the
same, is the fundamental fact. There is therefore a confusion of
two very intimately associated feelings in the ascertainment of
these feelings;--but who is it that ascertains? Faith is the very
first step in every sensual impression: a sort of yea-saying is the
first intellectual activity! A "holding-a-thing-to-be-true" is
the beginning. It were our business, therefore, to explain how the
"holding-of-a-thing-to-be-true" arose! What sensation lies beneath the
comment "true"?

The valuation, "I believe that this and that is so," is the essence
of "truth." In all valuations, the conditions of preservation and
of growth find expression. All our organs and senses of knowledge
have been developed only in view of the conditions of preservation
and growth. The trust in reason and its categories, the trust
in dialectics, and also the valuation of logic, prove only that
experience has taught the usefulness of these things to life: not
their "truth." The prerequisites of all living things and of their
lives is: that there should be a large amount of faith, that it should
be possible to pass definite judgments on things, and that there
should be no doubt at all concerning all essential values. Thus it is
necessary that something should be assumed to be true, not that it
is true.

"The real world and the world of appearance"-- I trace this
contrast to the relation of values. We have posited our conditions
of existence as the attributes of being in general. Owing to the
fact that, in order to prosper, we must be stable in our belief, we
developed the idea that the real world was neither a changing nor an
evolving one, but a world of being.

The Origin of Reason and Logic.

Originally there was chaos among our ideas. Those ideas which were able
to stand side by side remained over, the greater number perished--and
are still perishing.

The kingdom of desires out of which logic grew: the gregarious instinct
in the background. The assumption of similar facts is the first
condition for "similar souls." For the purpose of mutual understanding
and government.

Concerning the origin of logic. The fundamental proneness to
equalise things and to see them equal, gets to be modified,
and kept within bounds, by the consideration of what is useful or
harmful--in fact, by considerations of success: it then becomes adapted
in suchwise as to be gratified in a milder way, without at the same
time denying life or endangering it. This whole process corresponds
entirely with that external and mechanical process (which is its
symbol) by which the protoplasm continually assimilates, makes equal
to itself, what it appropriates, and arranges it according to its own
forms and requirements.

Likeness and Similarity.

The coarser the organ the more apparent likenesses it sees;

The mind will have likeness--that is to say, the identification
of one sensual impression with others already experienced: just as the
body assimilates inorganic matter.

For the understanding of Logic:--

The will which tends to see likeness everywhere is the will to
power--the belief that something is so and so (the essence of a
judgment), is the result of a will which would fain have it as
similar as possible.

Logic is bound up with the proviso: granted that identical cases
exist. As a matter of fact, before one can think and conclude in a
logical fashion, this condition must first be assumed. That is
to say, the will to logical truth cannot be consummated before a
fundamental falsification of all phenomena has been assumed. From which
it follows that an instinct rules here, which is capable of employing
both means: first, falsification; and secondly, the carrying out of its
own point of view: logic does not spring from a will to truth.

The inventive force which devised the categories, worked in the service
of our need of security, of quick intelligibility, in the form of
signs, sounds, and abbreviations.--"Substance," "subject," "object,"
"Being," "Becoming," are not matters of metaphysical truth. It was
the powerful who made the names of things into law, and, among the
powerful, it was the greatest artists in abstraction who created the
categories.

A moral--that is to say, a method of living which long experience
and experiment have tested and proved efficient, at last enters
consciousness as a law, as dominant.... And then the whole group of
related values and conditions become part of it: it becomes venerable,
unassailable, holy, true; a necessary part of its evolution is that
its origin should be forgotten.... That is a sign that it has become
master. Exactly the same thing might have happened with the categories
of reason: the latter, after much groping and many trials, might have
proved true through relative usefulness.... A stage was reached when
they were grasped as a whole, and when they appealed to consciousness
as a whole,--when belief in them was commanded,--that is to say, when
they acted as if they commanded.... From that time forward they passed
as a priori, as beyond experience, as irrefutable. And, possibly, they
may have been the expression of no more than a certain practicality
answering the ends of a race and a species,--their usefulness alone is
their "truth."

The object is, not "to know," but to schematise,--to impose as much
regularity and form upon chaos, as our practical needs require. In
the formation of reason, logic, and the categories, it was a need
in us that was the determining power: not the need "to know," but
to classify, to schematise, for the purpose of intelligibility and
calculation. (The adjustment and interpretation of all similar and
equal things,--the same process, which every sensual impression
undergoes, is the development of reason!) No pre-existing "idea" had
anything to do with it: but utility, which teaches us that things
can be reckoned with and managed, only when we view them roughly
as equal.... Finality in reason is an effect, not a cause: Life
degenerates with every other form of reason, although constant attempts
are being made to attain to those other forms of reason;--for Life
would then become too obscure, too unequal.

The categories are "truths" only in the sense that they are the
conditions of our existence, just as Euclid's Space is a conditional
"truth." (Between ourselves, as no one will maintain that men are
absolutely necessary, reason, as well as Euclid's Space, are seen
to be but an idiosyncrasy of one particular species of animals, one
idiosyncrasy alone among many others....)

The subjective constraint which prevents one from contradicting here,
is a biological constraint: the instinct which makes us see the utility
of concluding as we do conclude, is in our blood, we are almost this
instinct.... But what simplicity it is to attempt to derive from this
fact that we possess an absolute truth! ... The inability to contradict
anything is a proof of impotence but not of "truth."

We are not able to affirm and to deny one and the same thing: that
is a principle of subjective experience--which is not in the least
"necessary," but only a sign of inability.

If, according to Aristotle, the principium contradictionis is the
most certain of all principles; if it is the most ultimate of all,
and the basis of every demonstration; if the principle of every
other axiom lie within it: then one should analyse it all the more
severely, in order to discover how many assumptions already lie at
its root. It either assumes something concerning reality and Being,
as if these had become known in some other sphere--that is to say, as
if it were impossible to ascribe the opposite attributes to it; or
the proposition means: that the opposites should not be ascribed to
it. In that case, logic would be an imperative, not directed at the
knowledge of truth, but at the adjusting and fixing of a world which
must seem true to us.

In short, the question is a debatable one: are the axioms of logic
adequate to reality, or are they measures and means by which alone
we can, create realities, or the concept "reality"?... In order to
affirm the first alternative, however, one would, as we have seen,
require a previous knowledge of Being; which is certainly not the case.
The proposition therefore contains no criterion of truth, but an
imperative concerning that which should pass as true.

Supposing there were no such thing as A identical with itself, as
every logical (and mathematical) proposition presupposes, and that A
is in itself an appearance, then logic would have a mere world of
appearance as its first condition. As a matter of fact, we believe
in that proposition, under the influence of an endless empiricism
which seems to confirm it every minute. The "thing"--that is the
real substratum of A; our belief in things is the first condition of
our faith in logic. The A in logic is, like the atom, a reconstruction
of the thing.... By not understanding this, and by making logic
into a criterion of real being, we are already on the road to the
classification of all those hypostases, substance, attribute, object,
subject, action, etc., as realities--that is to say, the conception of
a metaphysical world or a "real world" (--this is, however, once more
the world of appearance...).

The primitive acts of thought, affirmation, and negation, the holding
of a thing for true, and the holding of a thing for not true,--in so
far as they do not only presuppose a mere habit, but the very right
to postulate truth or untruth at all,--are already dominated by a
belief, that there is such a thing as knowledge for us, and that
judgments can really hit the truth: in short, logic never doubts that
it is able to pronounce something concerning truth in itself (--that
is to say, that to the thing which is in itself true, no opposite
attributes can be ascribed).

In this belief there reigns the sensual and coarse prejudice that our
sensations teach us truths concerning things,--that I cannot at the
same moment of time say of one and the same thing that it is hard and
soft. (The instinctive proof, "I cannot have two opposite sensations
at once," is quite coarse and false.)

That all contradiction in concepts should be forbidden, is the result
of a belief, that we are able to form concepts, that a concept not
only characterises but also holds the essence of a thing.... As a
matter of fact, logic (like geometry and arithmetic) only holds good of
assumed existences which we have created. Logic is the attempt on
our part to understand the actual world according to a scheme of Being
devised by ourselves; or, more exactly, it is our attempt at making the
actual world more calculable and more susceptible to formulation, for
our own purposes....

In order to be able to think and to draw conclusions, it is necessary
to acknowledge that which exists: logic only deals with formulae for
things which are constant. That is why this acknowledgment would not in
the least prove reality: "that which is" is part of our optics. The ego
regarded as Being (not affected by either Becoming or evolution).

The assumed world of subject, substance, reason, etc., is necessary,
an adjusting, simplifying falsifying, artificially-separating power
resides in us. "Truth" is the will to be master over the manifold
sensations that reach consciousness; it is the will to classify
phenomena according to definite categories. In this way we start out
with a belief in the "true nature" of things (we regard phenomena as
real).

The character of the world in the process of Becoming is not
susceptible of formulation; it is "false" and "contradicts itself."
Knowledge and the process of evolution exclude each other.
Consequently, knowledge must be something else: it must be preceded
by a will to make things knowable, a kind of Becoming in itself must
create the illusion of Being.

If our "ego" is the only form of Being, according to which we make
and understand all Being: very good! In that case it were very
proper to doubt whether an illusion of perspective were not active
here--the apparent unity which everything assumes in our eyes on the
horizon-line. Appealing to the body for our guidance, we are confronted
by such appalling manifoldness, that for the sake of method it is
allowable to use that phenomenon which is richer and more easily
studied as a clue to the understanding of the poorer phenomenon.

Finally: admitting that all is Becoming, knowledge is only possible
when based on a belief in Being.

If there is "only one form of Being, the ego," and all other forms
of Being are made in its own image,--if, in short, the belief in the
"ego," together with the belief in logic, stands and falls with the
metaphysical truth of the categories of reason: if, in addition, the
"ego" is shown to be something that is evolving: then----

The continual transitions that occur, forbid our speaking of the
"individual," etc.; the "number" of beings itself fluctuates. We should
know nothing of time or of movement, if, in a rough way, we did not
believe we saw things "standing still" behind or in front of things
moving. We should also know just as little about cause and effect,
and without the erroneous idea of "empty space" we should never have
arrived at the concept of space at all. The principle of identity is
based on the "fact of appearance" that there are some things alike.
Strictly speaking, it would not be possible to "understand" and "know"
an evolving world; something which is called "knowledge" exists only
in so far as the "understanding" and "knowing" intellect already
finds an adjusted and rough world to hand, fashioned out of a host
of mere appearances, but become fixed to the extent in which this
kind of appearance has helped to preserve life; only to this extent is
"knowledge" possible--that is to say, as a measuring of earlier and
more recent errors by one another.

Concerning logical appearance.--The concept "individual" and the
concept "species" are equally false and only apparent. "Species" only
expresses the fact that an abundance of similar creatures come forth at
the same time, and that the speed of their further growth and of their
further transformation has been made almost imperceptible for a long
time: so that the actual and trivial changes and increase of growth are
of no account at all (--a stage of evolution in which the process of
evolving is not visible, so that, not only does a state of equilibrium
seem to have been reached, but the road is also made clear for the
error of supposing that an actual goal has been reached--and that
evolution had a goal...).

The form seems to be something enduring, and therefore valuable;
but the form was invented merely by ourselves; and however often
"the same form is attained," it does not signify that it is the
same form,--because something new always appears; and we alone, who
compare, reckon the new with the old, in so far as it resembles the
latter, and embody the two in the unity of "form." As if a type had
to be reached and were actually intended by the formative processes.

Form, species, law, idea, purpose--the same fault is made in respect
of all these concepts, namely, that of giving a false realism to a
piece of fiction: as if all phenomena were infused with some sort of
obedient spirit--an artificial distinction is here made between that
which acts and that which guides action (but both these things are
only fixed in order to agree with our metaphysico-logical dogma: they
are not "facts").

We should not interpret this constraint in ourselves, to imagine
concepts, species, forms, purposes, and laws ("a world of identical
cases") as if we were in a position to construct a real world; but
as a constraint to adjust a world by means of which our existence
will be ensured: we thereby create a world which is determinable,
simplified, comprehensible, etc., for us.

The very same constraint is active in the functions of the senses
which support the reason--by means of simplification, coarsening,
accentuation, and interpretation; whereon all "recognition," all the
ability of making one's self intelligible rests. Our needs have made
our senses so precise, that the "same world of appearance" always
returns, and has thus acquired the semblance of reality.

Our subjective constraint to have faith in logic, is expressive only
of the fact that long before logic itself became conscious in us, we
did nothing save introduce its postulates into the nature of things:
now we find ourselves in their presence,--we can no longer help
it,--and now we would fain believe that this constraint is a guarantee
of "truth." We it was who created the "thing," the "same thing," the
subject, the attribute, the action, the object, the substance, and
the form, after we had carried the process of equalising, coarsening,
and simplifying as far as possible. The world seems logical to us,
because we have already made it logical.

Fundamental solution.--We believe in reason: this is, however, the
philosophy of colourless concepts. Language is built upon the most
naif prejudices.

Now we read discord and problems into things, because we are able to
think only in the form of language--we also believe in the "eternal
truth" of "wisdom" (for instance, subject, attribute, etc.).

We cease from thinking if we do not wish to think under the control
of language; the most we can do is to attain to an attitude of doubt
concerning the question whether the boundary here really is a boundary.

Rational thought is a process of interpreting according to a scheme
which we cannot reject.

Consciousness.

There is no greater error than that of making psychical and physical
phenomena the two faces, the two manifestations of the same substance.
By this means nothing is explained: the concept "substance" is
utterly useless as a means of explanation. Consciousness may be
regarded as secondary, almost an indifferent and superfluous thing,
probably destined to disappear and to be superseded by perfect
automatism--

When we observe mental phenomena we may be likened to the deaf and dumb
who divine the spoken word, which they do not hear, from the movements
of the speaker's lips. From the appearance of the inner mind we draw
conclusions concerning invisible and other phenomena, which we could
ascertain if our powers of observation were adequate for the purpose.

For this inner world we have no finer organs, and that is why a
complexity which is thousandfold reaches our consciousness as a
simple entity, and we invent a process of causation in it, despite
the fact that we can perceive no cause either of the movement or of
the change--the sequence of thoughts and feelings is nothing more
than their becoming visible to consciousness. That this sequence
has anything to do with a chain of causes is not worthy of belief:
consciousness never communicates an example of cause and effect to us.

The part "consciousness" plays,--It is essential that one should not
mistake the part that "consciousness plays" it is our relation to the
outer world; it was the outer world that developed it. On the other
hand, the direction--that is to say, the care and cautiousness which
is concerned with the inter-relation of the bodily functions, does
not enter into our consciousness any more than does the storing
activity of the intellect: that there is a superior controlling
force at work in these things cannot be doubted--a sort of directing
committee, in which the various leading desires make their votes and
their power felt. "Pleasure" and "pain" are indications which reach us
from this sphere: as are also acts of will and ideas.

In short: That which becomes conscious has causal relations which are
completely and absolutely concealed from our knowledge--the sequence of
thoughts, feelings, and ideas, in consciousness, does not signify that
the order in which they come is a causal order: it is so apparently,
however, in the highest degree. We have based the whole of our notion
of intellect, reason, logic, etc., upon this apparent truth (all
these things do not exist: they are imaginary syntheses and entities),
and we then projected the latter into and behind all things!

As a rule consciousness itself is understood to be the general
sensorium and highest ruling centre; albeit, it is only a means of
communication: it was developed by intercourse, and with a view to
the interests of intercourse.... "Intercourse" is understood, here,
as "relation," and is intended to cover the action of the outer world
upon us and our necessary response to it, as also our actual influence
upon the outer world. It is not the conducting force, but an organ
of the latter.

My principle, compressed into a formula which savours of antiquity, of
Christianity, Scholasticism, and other kinds of musk: in the concept,
"God is spirit," God as perfection is "denied...."

Wherever people have observed a certain unity in the grouping of
things, spirit has always been regarded as the cause of this
co-ordination: an assumption for which reasons are entirely lacking.
Why should the idea of a complex fact be one of the conditions of that
fact? Or why should the notion of a complex fact have to precede it
as its cause?

We must be on our guard against explaining finality by the spirit:
there is absolutely no reason whatever for ascribing to spirit the
peculiar power of organising and systematising. The domain of the
nervous system is much more extensive: the realm of consciousness is
superadded. In the collective process of adaptation and systematising,
consciousness plays no part at all.

Physiologists, like philosophers, believe that consciousness increases
in value in proportion as it gains in clearness: the most lucid
consciousness and the most logical and impassive thought are of the
first order. Meanwhile--according to what standard is this value
determined?--In regard to the discharge of will-power the most
superficial and most simple thought is the most useful--it might
therefore, etc. etc. (because it leaves few motives over).

Precision in action is opposed to the far-sighted and often
uncertain judgments of caution: the latter is led by the deeper
instinct.

The chief error of psychologists: they regard the indistinct idea as
of a lower kind than the distinct; but that which keeps at a distance
from our consciousness and which is therefore obscure, may on that
very account be quite clear in itself. The fact that a thing becomes
obscure is a question of the perspective of consciousness.

The great misapprehensions:--

The senseless overestimation of consciousness, its elevation to
the dignity of an entity: "a spirit," "a soul," something that feels,
thinks, and wills;

The spirit regarded as a cause, especially where finality,
system, and co-ordination appear;

Consciousness classed as the highest form attainable, as the most
superior kind of being, as "God";

Will introduced wherever effects are observed;

The "real world" regarded as the spiritual world, accessible by
means of the facts of consciousness;

Absolute knowledge regarded as the faculty of consciousness,
wherever knowledge exists at all.

Consequences:--

Every step forward consists of a step forward in consciousness; every
step backwards is a step into unconsciousness (unconsciousness was
regarded as a falling-back upon the passions and senses--as a
state of animalism ....)

Man approaches reality and real being through dialectics: man departs
from them by means of instincts, senses, and automatism....

To convert man into a spirit, would mean to make a god of him: spirit,
will, goodness--all one.

All goodness must take its root in spirituality, must be a fact of
consciousness.

Every step made towards something better can be only a step forward
in consciousness.

Judgment. True--false.

Kant's theological bias, his unconscious dogmatism, his moral outlook,
ruled, guided, and directed him.

The prohton pseudos: how is the fact knowledge possible? Is knowledge
a fact at all? What is knowledge? If we do not know what knowledge
is, we cannot possibly reply to the question, Is there such a thing
as knowledge? Very fine! But if I do not already "know" whether
there is, or can be, such a thing as knowledge, I cannot reasonably
ask the question, "What is knowledge?" Kant believes in the fact of
knowledge: what he requires is a piece of naivete: the knowledge of
knowledge!

"Knowledge is judgment." But judgment is a belief that something is
this or that! And not knowledge! "All knowledge consists in synthetic
judgments" which have the character of being universally true (the
fact is so in all cases, and does not change), and which have the
character of being necessary (the reverse of the proposition cannot
be imagined to exist).

The validity of a belief in knowledge is always taken for granted; as
is also the validity of the feelings which conscience dictates. Here
moral ontology is the ruling bias.

The conclusion, therefore, is: (1) there are propositions which we
believe to be universally true and necessary.

This character of universal truth and of necessity cannot spring
from experience.

Consequently it must base itself upon no experience at all, but
upon something else, it must be derived from another source of
knowledge!

Kant concludes (1) that there are some propositions which hold good
only on one condition; (2) this condition is that they do not spring
from experience, but from pure reason.

Thus, the question is, whence do we derive our reasons for believing
in the truth of such propositions? No, whence does our belief get
its cause? But the origin of a belief, of a strong conviction,
is a psychological problem: and very limited and narrow experience
frequently brings about such a belief! It already presupposes that
there are not only "data a posteriori" but also "data a priori"--
that is to say, "previous to experience." Necessary and universal truth
cannot be given by experience: it is therefore quite clear that it has
come to us without experience at all?

There is no such thing as an isolated judgment!

An isolated judgment is never "true," it is never knowledge; only in
connection with, and when related to, many other judgments, is a
guarantee of its truth forthcoming.

What is the difference between true and false belief? What is
knowledge? He "knows" it, that is heavenly! Necessary and universal
truth cannot be given by experience! It is therefore independent of
experience, of all experience! The view which comes quite a priori,
and therefore independent of all experience, merely out of reason, is
"pure knowledge"!

"The principles of logic, the principle of identity and of
contradiction, are examples of pure knowledge, because they precede all
experience."--But these principles are not cognitions, but regulative
articles of faith.

In order to establish the a priori character (the pure rationality)
of mathematical axioms, space must be conceived as a form of pure
reason.

Hume had declared that there were no a priori synthetic judgments.
Kant says there are--the mathematical ones! And if there are such
judgments, there may also be such things as metaphysics and a knowledge
of things by means of pure reason!

Mathematics is possible under conditions which are not allowed to
metaphysics. All human knowledge is either experience or mathematics.

A judgment is synthetic--that is to say, it co-ordinates various ideas.
It is a priori--that is to say, this co-ordination is universally
true and necessary, and is arrived at, not by sensual experience, but
by pure reason.

If there are such things as a priori judgments, then reason must be
able to co-ordinate: co-ordination is a form. Reason must possess a
formative faculty.

Judging is our oldest faith; it is our habit of believing this to be
true or false, of asserting or denying, our certainty that something
is thus and not otherwise, our belief that we really "know"--what is
believed to be true in all judgments?

What are attributes?--We did not regard changes in ourselves merely
as such, but as "things in themselves," which are strange to us, and
which we only "perceive"; and we did not class them as phenomena,
but as Being, as "attributes"; and in addition we invented a creature
to which they attach themselves--that is to say, we made the effect
the working cause, and the latter we made Being. But even in
this plain statement, the concept "effect" is arbitrary: for in regard
to those changes which occur in us, and of which we are convinced
we ourselves are not the cause, we still argue that they must be
effects: and this is in accordance with the belief that "every change
must have its author";--but this belief in itself is already mythology;
for it separates the working cause from the cause in work. When I
say the "lightning flashes," I set the flash down, once as an action
and a second time as a subject acting; and thus a thing is fancifully
affixed to a phenomenon, which is not one with it, but which is
stable, which is, and does not "come."--To make the phenomenon the
working cause, and to make the effect into a thing--into Being:
this is the double error, or interpretation, of which we are guilty.

The Judgment--that is the faith: "This and this is so. In every
judgment, therefore, there lies the admission that an "identical"
case has been met with: it thus takes some sort of comparison for
granted, with the help of the memory. Judgment does not create the
idea that an identical case seems to be there. It believes rather that
it actually perceives such a case; it works on the hypothesis that
there are such things as identical cases. But what is that much older
function called, which must have been active much earlier, and which
in itself equalises unequal cases and makes them alike? What is that
second function called, which with this first one as a basis, etc. etc,
"That which provokes the same sensations as another thing is equal
to that other thing": but what is that called which makes sensations
equal, which regards them as equal?--There could be no judgments if
a sort of equalising process were not active within all sensations:
memory is only possible by means of the underscoring of all that has
already been experienced and learned. Before a judgment can be formed,
the process of assimilation must already have been completed: thus,
even here, an intellectual activity is to be observed which does
not enter consciousness in at all the same way as the pain which
accompanies a wound. Probably the psychic phenomena correspond to all
the organic functions--that is to say, they consist of assimilation,
rejection, growth, etc.

The essential thing is to start out from the body and to use it as the
general clue. It is by far the richer phenomenon, and allows of much
more accurate observation. The belief in the body is much more soundly
established than the belief in spirit.

"However strongly a thing may be believed, the degree of belief is no
criterion of its truth." But what is truth? Perhaps it is a form of
faith, which has become a condition of existence? Then strength would
certainly be a criterion; for instance, in regard to causality.

Logical accuracy, transparency, considered as the criterion
of truth ("omne illud verum est, quod clare et distincte
percipitur."--Descartes): by this means the mechanical hypothesis of
the world becomes desirable and credible.

But this is gross confusion: like simplex sigillum veri. Whence comes
the knowledge that the real nature of things stands in this relation
to our intellect? Could it not be otherwise? Could it not be this,
that the hypothesis which gives the intellect the greatest feeling of
power and security, is preferred, valued, and marked as true--The
intellect sets its freest and strongest faculty and ability
as the criterion of what is most valuable, consequently of what is
true....

"True"--from the standpoint of sentiment--is that which most
provokes sentiment ("I");

from the standpoint of thought--is that which gives thought
the greatest sensation of strength;

from the standpoint of touch, sight, and hearing--is that
which calls forth the greatest resistance.

Thus it is the highest degrees of activity which awaken belief in
regard to the object, in regard to its "reality." The sensations of
strength, struggle, and resistance convince the subject that there is
something which is being resisted.

The criterion of truth lies in the enhancement of the feeling of power.

According to my way of thinking, "truth" does not necessarily mean
the opposite of error, but, in the most fundamental cases, merely
the relation of different errors to each other: thus one error might
be older, deeper than another, perhaps altogether ineradicable, one
without which organic creatures like ourselves could not exist;
whereas other errors might not tyrannise over us to that extent as
conditions of existence, but when measured according to the standard
of those other "tyrants," could even be laid aside and "refuted." Why
should an irrefutable assumption necessarily be "true"? This question
may exasperate the logicians who limit things according to the
limitations they find in themselves: but I have long since declared war
with this logician's optimism.

Everything simple is simply imaginary, but not "true." That which is
real and true is, however, neither a unity nor reducible to a unity.

What is truth?--Inertia; that hypothesis which brings satisfaction,
the smallest expense of intellectual strength, etc.

First proposition. The easier way of thinking always triumphs
over the more difficult way;--dogmatically: simplex sigillum
veri.--Dico: to suppose that clearness is any proof of truth, is
absolute childishness. . . .

Second proposition. The teaching of Being, of things, and of all those
constant entities, is a hundred times more easy than the teaching of
Becoming and of evolution. . .

Third proposition. Logic was intended to be a method of facilitating
thought: a means of expression, --not truth. . . . Later on it got to
act like truth. . . .

Parmenides said: "One can form no concept of the non-existent";--we are
at the other extreme, and say, "That Of which a concept can be formed,
is certainly fictional."

There are many kinds of eyes. Even the Sphinx has eyes--therefore there
must be many kinds of "truths," and consequently there can be no truth.

Inscriptions over the porch of a modern lunatic asylum.

"That which is necessarily true in thought must be necessarily true in
morality."--HERBERT SPENCER.

"The ultimate test of the truth of a proposition is the
inconceivableness of its negation,"--HERBERT SPENCER.

If the character of existence were false,:--and this would be
possible,--what would truth then be, all our truth? ... An unprincipled
falsification of the false? A higher degree of falseness? ...

In a world which was essentially false, truthfulness would be an
anti-natural tendency: its only purpose would be to provide a means
of attaining to a higher degree of falsity. For a world of truth and
Being to be simulated, the truthful one would first have to be created
(it being understood that he must believe himself to be "truthful").

Simple, transparent, not in contradiction with himself, lasting,
remaining always the same to himself, free from faults, sudden changes,
dissimulation, and form: such a man conceives a world of Being as
"God" in His own image.

In order that truthfulness may be possible, the whole sphere in which
man moves must be very tidy, small, and respectable: the advantage
in every respect must be with the truthful one.--Lies, tricks,
dissimulations, must cause astonishment.

"Dissimulation" increases in accordance with the rising order of
rank among organic beings. In the inorganic world it seems to be
entirely absent. There power opposes power quite roughly --ruse
begins in the organic world; plants are already masters of it. The
greatest men, such as Caesar and Napoleon (see Stendhal's remark
concerning him),[3] as also the higher races (the Italians), the Greeks
(Odysseus); the most supreme cunning, belongs to the very essence
of the elevation of man. ... The problem of the actor. My Dionysian
ideal.... The optics of all the organic functions, of all the strongest
vital instincts: the power which will have error in all life; error
as the very first principle of thought itself. Before "thought" is
possible, "fancy" must first have done its work; the picturing of
identical cases, of the seemingness of identity, is more primeval
than the cognition of identity.

[Footnote 3: The reference to Stendhal here, seems to point to a
passage in his Life of Napoleon (Preface, p. xv) of which Nietzsche
had made a note in another place, and which reads: "Une croyance
presque instinctive chez moi c'est que tout homme puissant ment quand
il parle et a plus forte raison quand il ecrit."]

Against Causality.

I believe in absolute space as the basis of force, and I believe the
latter to be limited and formed. Time, eternal. But space and time
as things in themselves do not exist. "Changes" are only appearances
(or mere processes of our senses to us); if we set recurrence,
however regular, between them, nothing is proved beyond the fact that
it has always happened so. The feeling that post hoc is propter
hoc, is easily explained as the result of a misunderstanding, it is
comprehensible. But appearances cannot be "causes"!

The interpretation of a phenomenon, either as an action or as the
endurance of an action (that is to say, every action involves the
suffering of it), amounts to this: every change, every differentiation,
presupposes the existence of an agent and somebody acted upon, who is
"altered."

Psychological history of the concept subject. The body, the thing,
the "whole," which is visualised by the eye, awakens the thought of
distinguishing between an action and an agent; the idea that the agent
is the cause of the action, after having been repeatedly refined, at
length left the "subject" over.

Our absurd habit of regarding a mere mnemonic sign or abbreviated
formula as an independent being, and ultimately as a cause; as, for
instance, when we say of lightning that it flashes, even the little
word "I." A sort of double-sight in seeing which makes sight a cause
of seeing in itself: this was the feat in the invention of the
"subject" of the "ego."

"Subject," "object," "attribute"--these distinctions have been made,
and are now used like schemes to cover all apparent facts. The false
fundamental observation is this, that I believe it is I who does
something, who suffers something, who "has" something, who "has" a
quality.

In every judgment lies the whole faith in subject, attribute, or cause
and effect (in the form of an assumption that every effect is the
result of activity, and that all activity presupposes an agent), and
even this last belief is only an isolated case of the first, so that
faith remains as the most fundamental belief! there are such things as
subjects, everything that happens is related attributively to a subject
of some sort.

I notice something, and try to discover the reason of it: originally
this was, I look for an intention behind it, and, above all, I
look for one who has an intention, for a subject, an agent: every
phenomenon is an action, formerly intentions were seen behind all
phenomena, this is our oldest habit. Has the animal also this habit?
As a living organism, is it not also compelled to interpret things
through itself. The question why? is always a question concerning the
causa finalis, and the general "purpose" of things. We have no sign
of the "sense of the efficient cause"; in this respect Hume is quite
right, habit (but not only that of the individual) allows us to expect
that a certain process, frequently observed, will follow upon another,
but nothing more! That which gives us such an extraordinarily firm
faith in causality, is not the rough habit of observing the sequence of
processes, but our inability to interpret a phenomenon otherwise
than as the result of design. It is the belief in living and
thinking things, as the only agents of causation; it is the belief in
will, in design--the belief that all phenomena are actions, and that
all actions presuppose an agent; it is the belief in the "subject." Is
not this belief in the concepts subject and object an arrant absurdity?

Question: Is the design the cause of a phenomenon? Or is that also
illusion? Is it not the phenomenon itself?

A criticism of the concept "cause."--We have absolutely no experience
concerning cause, viewed psychologically we derive the whole concept
from the subjective conviction, that we ourselves are causes--that is
to say, that the arm moves.... But that is an error. We distinguish
ourselves, the agents, from the action, and everywhere we make use of
this scheme--we try to discover an agent behind every phenomenon. What
have we done? We have misunderstood a feeling of power, tension,
resistance, a muscular feeling, which is already the beginning of the
action, and posited it as a cause; or we have understood the will to
do this or that, as a cause, because the action follows it. There is
no such thing as "Cause," in those few cases in which it seemed to
be given, and in which we projected it out of ourselves in order to
understand a phenomenon, it has been shown to be an illusion. Our
understanding of a phenomenon consisted in our inventing a subject
who was responsible for something happening, and for the manner in
which it happened. In our concept "cause" we have embraced our feeling
of will, our feeling of "freedom," our feeling of responsibility and
our design to do an action: causa efficiens and causa finalis are
fundamentally one.

We believed that an effect was explained when we could point to a state
in which it was inherent. As a matter of fact, we invent all causes
according to the scheme of the effect: the latter is known to us.... On
the other hand, we are not in a position to say of any particular thing
how it will "act." The thing, the subject the will, the design--all
inherent in the conception "cause." We try to discover things in order
to explain why something has changed. Even the "atom" is one of these
fanciful inventions like the "thing" and the "primitive subject."...

At last we understand that things--consequently also atoms--effect
nothing: because they are non-existent; and that the concept
causality is quite! useless. Out of a necessary sequence of states,
the latter's causal relationship does not follow (that would be
equivalent to extending their active principle from 1 to 2, to 3, to
4, to 5). There is no such thing as a cause or an effect. From the
standpoint of language we do not know how to rid ourselves of them.
But that does not matter. If I imagine muscle separated from its
"effects," I have denied it....

In short: a phenomenon is neither effected nor capable of effecting.
Causa is a faculty to effect something, superadded fancifully to
what happens....

The interpretation of causality is an illusion.... A "thing" is the
sum of its effects, synthetically united by means of a concept, an
image. As a matter of fact, science has robbed the concept causality
of all meaning, and has reserved it merely as an allegorical formula,
which has made it a matter of indifference whether cause or effect be
put on this side or on that. It is asserted that in two complex states
(centres of force) the quantities of energy remain constant.

The calculability of a phenomenon does not lie in the fact that
a rule is observed, or that a necessity is obeyed, or that we have
projected a law of causality into every phenomenon: it lies in the
recurrence of "identical cases."

There is no such thing as a sense of causality, as Kant would have
us believe. We are aghast, we feel insecure, we will have something
familiar, which can be relied upon.... As soon as we are shown the
existence of something old in a new thing, we are pacified. The
so-called instinct of causality is nothing more than the fear of
the unfamiliar, and the attempt at finding something in it which is
already known.--It is not a search for causes, but for the familiar.

To combat determinism and teleology.--From the fact that something
happens regularly, and that its occurrence may be reckoned upon, it
does not follow that it happens necessarily. If a quantity of force
determines and conducts itself in a certain way in every particular
case, it does not prove that it has "no free will." "Mechanical
necessity" is not an established fact: it was we who first read
into the nature of all phenomena. We interpreted the possibility of
formularising phenomena as a result of the dominion of necessary law
over all existence. But it does not follow, because I do a determined
thing, that I am bound to do it. Compulsion cannot be demonstrated
in things: all that the rule proves is this, that one and the same
phenomenon is not another phenomenon. Owing to the very fact that we
fancied the existence of subjects "agents" in things, the notion
arose that all phenomena are the consequence of a compulsory force
exercised over the subject--exercised by whom? once more by an "agent."
The concept "Cause and Effect" is a dangerous one, so long as people
believe in something that causes, and a something that is caused.

Necessity is not an established fact, but an interpretation.

When it is understood that the "subject" is nothing that acts,
but only a thing of fancy, there is much that follows.

Only with the subject as model we invented thingness and read it into
the pell-mell of sensations. If we cease from believing in the acting
subject, the belief in acting things, in reciprocal action, in cause
and effect between phenomena which we call things, also falls to pieces.

In this case the world of acting atoms also disappears: for this
world is always assumed to exist on the pre-determined grounds that
subjects are necessary.

Ultimately, of course, the "thing-in-itself" also disappears: for
at bottom it is the conception of a "subject-in-itself." But we
have seen that the subject is an imaginary thing. The antithesis
"thing-in-itself" and "appearance" is untenable; but in this way the
concept "appearance" also disappears.

If we abandon the idea of the acting subject, we also abandon
the object acted upon. Duration, equality to self, Being, are
inherent neither in what is called subject, nor in what is called
object: they are complex phenomena, and in regard to other phenomena
are apparently durable--they are distinguishable, for instance, by
the different tempo with which they happen (repose--movement, fixed
--loose: all antitheses which do not exist in themselves and by means
of which differences of degree only are expressed; from a certain
limited point of view, though, they seem to be antitheses. There are no
such things as antitheses; it is from logic that we derive our concept
of contrasts--and starting out from its standpoint we spread the error
over all things).

If we abandon the ideas "subject" and "object"; then we must also
abandon the idea "substance"--and therefore its various modifications
too; for instance: "matter," "spirit," and other hypothetical things,
"eternity and the immutability of matter," etc. We are then rid of
materiality.

From a moral standpoint the world is false. But inasmuch as morality
itself is a part of this world, morality also is false. The will
to truth is a process of establishing things, it is a process of
making things true and lasting, a total elimination of that false
character, a transvaluation of it into being. Thus, "truth" is not
something which is present and which has to be found and discovered; it
is something which has to be created and which gives its name to a
process, or, better still, to the Will to overpower, which in itself
has no purpose: to introduce truth is a processus in infinitum, an
active determining--it is not a process of becoming conscious of
something, which in itself is fixed and determined. It is merely a word
for "The Will to Power."

Life is based on the hypothesis of a belief in stable and regularly
recurring things, the mightier it is, the more vast must be the world
of knowledge and the world called being. Logicising, rationalising, and
systematising are of assistance as means of existence.

Man projects his instinct of truth, his "aim," to a certain extent
beyond himself, in the form of a metaphysical world of Being, a
"thing-in-itself," a world already to hand. His requirements as a
creator make him invent the world in which he works in advance; he
anticipates it: this anticipation (this faith in truth) is his mainstay.

All phenomena, movement, Becoming, regarded as the establishment of
relations of degree and of force, as a contest....

As soon as we fancy that some one is responsible for the fact that
we are thus and thus, etc. (God, Nature), and that we ascribe our
existence, our happiness, our misery, our destiny, to that some one,
we corrupt the innocence of Becoming for ourselves. We then have some
one who wishes to attain to something by means of us and with us.

The "welfare of the individual" is just as fanciful as the "welfare
of the species": the first is not sacrificed to the last; seen
from afar, the species is just as fluid as the individual. "The
preservation of the species" is only a result of the growth of the
species--that is to say, of the overcoming of the species on the road
to a stronger kind.

Theses:--The apparent conformity of means to end ("the conformity of
means to end which far surpasses the art of man) is merely the result
of that "Will to Power" which manifests itself in all phenomena:--To
become stronger involves a process of ordering, which may well be
mistaken for an attempted conformity of means to end:--The ends which
are apparent are not intended but, as soon as a superior power prevails
over an inferior power, and the latter proceeds to work as a function
of the former, an order of rank is established, an organisation which
must give rise to the idea that there is an arrangement of means and
ends.

Against apparent "necessity":--

This is only an expression for the fact that a certain power is not
also something else.

Against the apparent conformity of means to ends":--

The latter is only an expression for the order among the spheres of
power and their interplay.

The Thing-in-Itself and Appearance.

The foul blemish on Kant's criticism has at last become visible
even to the coarsest eyes: Kant had no right to his distinction
"appearance" and "thing-in-itself,"--in his own writings he had
deprived himself of the right of differentiating any longer in this
old and hackneyed manner, seeing that he had condemned the practice of
drawing any conclusions concerning the cause of an appearance from the
appearance itself, as unallowable in accordance with his conception
of the idea of causality and its purely intraphenomenal validity,
and this conception, on the other hand, already anticipates that
differentiation, as if the "thing in itself" were not only inferred
but actually given.

It is obvious that neither things-in-themselves nor appearances can
be related to each other in the form of cause and effect: and from this
it follows that the concept "cause and effect" is not applicable in a
philosophy which believes in things-in-themselves and in appearances.
Kant's mistake--... As a matter of fact, from a psychological
standpoint, the concept "cause and effect" is derived from an attitude
of mind which believes it sees the action of will upon will everywhere,
which believes only in living things, and at bottom only in souls (not
in things). Within the mechanical view of the world (which is logic
and its application to space and time) that concept is reduced to
the mathematical formula with which--and this is a fact which cannot
be sufficiently emphasised--nothing is ever understood, but rather
defined--deformed.

The greatest of all fables is the one relating to knowledge. People
would like to know how things-in-themselves are constituted: but
behold, there are no things-in-themselves! But even supposing there
were an "in-itself," an unconditional thing, it could on that very
account not be known! Something unconditioned cannot be known:
otherwise it would not be unconditioned! Knowing, however, is always a
process of "coming into relation with something"; the knowledge-seeker,
on this principle, wants the thing, which he would know, to be nothing
to him, and to be nothing to anybody at all: and from this there
results a contradiction,--in the first place, between this will to
know, and this desire that the thing to be known should be nothing
to him (wherefore know at all then?); and secondly, because something
which is nothing to anybody, does not even exist, and therefore
cannot be known. Knowing means: "to place one's self in relation with
something," to feel one's self conditioned by something and one's
self conditioning it under all circumstances, then, it is a process
of making stable or fixed, of defining, of making conditions
conscious (not a process of sounding things, creatures, or objects
in-themselves).

A "thing-in-itself" is just as absurd as a "sense-in-itself," a
"meaning-in-itself." There is no such thing as a "fact-in-itself,"
for a meaning must always be given to it before it can become a fact.

The answer to the question, "What is that?" is a process of fixing a
meaning from a different standpoint. The "essence" the "essential
factor," is something which is only seen as a whole in perspective,
and which presupposes a basis which is multifarious. Fundamentally the
question is "What is that for me?" (for us, for everything that lives,
etc. etc.).

A thing would be defined when all creatures had asked and answered this
question, "What is that?" concerning it. Supposing that one single
creature, with its own relations and standpoint in regard to all
things, were lacking, that thing would still remain undefined.

In short: the essence of a thing is really only an opinion concerning
that "thing." Or, better still; "it is worth" is actually what is
meant by "it is" or by "that is."

One may not ask: "Who interprets, then?" for the act of interpreting
itself as a form of the Will to Power, manifests itself (not as
"Being," but as a process, as Becoming) as a passion.

The origin of "things" is wholly the work of the idealising, thinking,
willing, and feeling subject. The concept thing as well as all its
attributes.--Even "the subject" is a creation of this order, a "thing"
like all others: a simplification, aiming at a definition of the
power that fixes, invents, and thinks, as such, as distinct from
all isolated fixing, inventing, and thinking. Thus a capacity defined
or distinct from all other individual capacities; at bottom action
conceived collectively in regard to all the action which has yet to
come (action and the probability of similar action).

The qualities of a thing are its effects upon other "things."

If one imagines other "things" to be non-existent, a thing has no
qualities.

That is to say; there is nothing without other things.

That is to say; there is no "thing-in-itself."

The thing-in-itself is nonsense. If I think all the "relations," all
the "qualities" all the "activities" of a thing, away, the thing itself
does not remain: for "thingness" was only invented fancifully by
us to meet certain logical needs--that is to say, for the purposes of
definition and comprehension (in order to correlate that multitude of
relations, qualities, and activities).

"Things which have a nature in themselves"--a dogmatic idea, which
must be absolutely abandoned.

That things should have a nature in themselves, quite apart from
interpretation and subjectivity, is a perfectly idle hypothesis:
it would presuppose that interpretation and the act of being
subjective are not essential, that a thing divorced from all its
relations can still be a thing.

Or, the other way round: the apparent objective character of things;
might it not be merely the result of a difference of degree within
the subject perceiving?--could not that which changes slowly strike
us as being objective, lasting, Being, "in-itself"?--could not the
objective view be only a false way of conceiving things and a contrast
within the perceiving subject?

If all unity were only unity as organisation. But the "thing" in
which we believe was invented only as a substratum to the various
attributes. If the thing "acts," it means: we regard all the other
qualities which are to hand, and which are momentarily latent, as
the cause accounting for the fact that one individual quality steps
forward--that is to say, we take the sum of its qualities--x--as
the cause of the quality x; which is obviously quite absurd and
imbecile!

All unity is only so in the form of organisation and collective
action: in the same way as a human community is a unity--that is to
say, the reverse of atomic anarchy; thus it is a body politic,
which stands for one, yet is not one.

"At some time in the development of thought, a point must have been
reached when man became conscious of the fact that what he called
the qualities of a thing were merely the sensations of the feeling
subject: and thus the qualities ceased from belonging to the thing."
The "thing-in-itself" remained over. 'The distinction between the
thing-in-itself and the thing-for-us, is based upon that older and
artless observation which would fain grant energy to things: but
analysis revealed that even force was only ascribed to them by our
fancy, as was also--substance. "The thing affects a subject?" Thus the
root of the idea of substance is in language, not in things outside
ourselves! The thing-in-itself is not a problem at all!

Being will have to be conceived as a sensation which is no longer based
upon anything quite devoid of sensation.

In movement no new meaning is given to feeling. That which is, cannot
be the substance of movement: it is therefore a form of Being.

N.B.--The explanation of life may be sought, in the first
place, through mental images of phenomena which precede it
(purposes);

Secondly, through mental images of phenomena which follow
behind it (the mathematico-physical explanation).

The two should not be confounded. Thus: the physical explanation, which
is the symbolisation of the world by means of feeling and thought,
cannot in itself make feeling and thinking originate again and show
its derivation: physics must rather construct the world of feeling,
consistently without feeling or purpose right up to the highest man.
And teleology is only a history of purposes, and is never physical.

Our method of acquiring "knowledge" is limited to a process of
establishing quantities, but we can by no means help feeling the
difference of quantity as differences of quality. Quality is merely a
relative truth for us; it is not a "thing-in-itself."

Our senses have a certain definite quantum as a mean, within the limits
of which they perform their functions--that is to say, we become
conscious of bigness and smallness in accordance with the conditions of
our existence. If we sharpened or blunted our senses tenfold, we should
perish--that is to say, we feel even proportions as qualities in
regard to our possibilities of existence.

But could not all quantities be merely tokens of qualities? Another
consciousness and scale of desires must correspond to greater power
in fact, another point of view; growth in itself is the expression of
a desire to become more; the desire for a greater quantum springs
from a certain quale, in a purely quantitative world, everything
would be dead, stiff, and motionless.--The reduction of all qualities
to quantities is nonsense: it is discovered that they can only stand
together, an analogy--

Qualities are our insurmountable barriers; we cannot possibly help
feeling mere differences of quantity as something fundamentally
different from quantity--that is to say, as qualities, which we can
no longer reduce to terms of quantity. But everything in regard to
which the word "knowledge" has any sense at all, belongs to the realm
of reckoning, weighing, and measuring, to quantity whereas, conversely,
all our valuations (that is to say, our sensations) belong precisely to
the realm of qualities, i.e. to those truths which belong to us alone
and to our point of view, and which absolutely cannot be "known." It is
obvious that every one of us, different creatures, must feel different
qualities, and must therefore live in a different world from the rest.
Qualities are an idiosyncrasy proper to human nature; the demand that
these our human interpretations and values, should be general and
perhaps real values, belongs to the hereditary madnesses of human pride.

The "real world," in whatever form it has been conceived hitherto--was
always the world of appearance over again.

The world of appearance, i.e. a world regarded in the light of
values; ordered, selected according to values--that is to say, in
this case, according to the standpoint of utility in regard to the
preservation and the increase of power of a certain species of animals.

It is the point of view, then, which accounts for the character of
"appearance." As if a world could remain over, when the point of view
is cancelled! By such means relativity would also be cancelled!

Every centre of energy has its point of view of the whole of the
remainder of the world--that is to say, its perfectly definite
valuation, its mode of action, its mode of resistance. The "world of
appearance" is thus reduced to a specific kind of action on the world
proceeding from a centre.

But there is no other kind of action: and the "world" is only a word
for the collective play of these actions. Reality consists precisely
in this particular action and reaction of every isolated factor against
the whole.

There no longer remains a shadow of a right to speak here of
"appearance." ...

The specific way of reacting is the only way of reacting; we do not
know how many kinds and what sort of kinds there are.

But there is no "other," no "real," no essential being,--for thus a
world without action and reaction would be expressed....

The antithesis: world of appearance and real world, is thus reduced to
the antitheses "world" and "nonentity."

A criticism of the concept "real and apparent world."--Of these two
the first is a mere fiction, formed out of a host of imaginary things.

Appearance itself belongs to reality: it is a form of its being; i.e.
in a world where there is no such thing as being, a certain calculable
world of identical cases must first be created through appearance;
a tempo in which observation and comparison is possible, etc.

"Appearance" is an adjusted and simplified world, in which our
practical instincts have worked: for us it is perfectly true: for we
live in it, we can live in it: this is the proof of its truth as
far as we are concerned....

The world, apart from the fact that we have to live in it--the
world, which we have not adjusted to our being, our logic, and our
psychological prejudices--does not exist as a world "in-itself"; it
is essentially a world of relations: under certain circumstances it has
a different aspect from every different point at which it is seen:
it presses against every point, and every point resists it--and these
collective relations are in every case incongruent.

The measure of power determines what being possesses the other
measure of power: under what form, force, or constraint, it acts or
resists.

Our particular case is interesting enough: we have created a conception
in order to be able to live in a world, in order to perceive just
enough to enable us to endure life in that world....

The nature of our psychological vision is determined by the fact--

That communication is necessary, and that for communication
to be possible something must be stable, simplified, and capable of
being stated precisely (above all, in the so-called identical case).
In order that it may be communicable, it must be felt as something
adjusted, as "recognisable." The material of the senses, arranged
by the understanding, reduced to coarse leading features, made similar
to other things, and classified with its like. Thus: the indefiniteness
and the chaos of sense-impressions are, as it were, made logical.

The phenomenal world is the adjusted world which we believe
to be real, Its "reality" lies in the constant return of similar,
familiar, and related things, in their rationalised character, and in
the belief that we are here able to reckon and determine.

The opposite of this phenomenal world is not "the real world,"
but the amorphous and unadjustable world consisting of the chaos of
sensations--that is to say, another kind of phenomenal; world, a
world which to us is "unknowable."

The question how things-in-themselves are constituted, quite apart
from our sense-receptivity and from the activity of our understanding,
must be answered by the further question: how were we able to know
that things existed? "Thingness" is one of our own inventions. The
question is whether there are not a good many more ways of creating
such a world of appearance--and whether this creating, rationalising,
adjusting, and falsifying be not the best-guaranteed reality itself:
in short, whether that which "fixes the meaning of things" is not
the only reality: and whether the "effect of environment upon us"
be not merely the result of such will-exercising subjects.... The
other "creatures" act upon us; our adjusted world of appearance
is an arrangement and an overpowering of its activities: a sort
of defensive measure. The subject alone is demonstrable;
the hypothesis might be advanced that subjects are all that
exist,--that "object" is only a form of action of subject upon
subject ... a modus of the subject.

The Metaphysical Need.

If one resembles all the philosophers that have gone before, one
can have no eyes for what has existed and what will exist--one sees
only what is. But as there is no such thing as Being; all that the
philosophers had to deal with was a host of fancies, this was their
"world."

To assert the existence as a whole of things concerning which we know
nothing, simply because there is an advantage in not being able to know
anything of them, was a piece of artlessness on Kant's part, and the
result of the recoil-stroke of certain needs--especially in the realm
of morals and metaphysics.

An artist cannot endure reality; he turns away or back from it: his
earnest opinion is that the worth of a thing consists in that nebulous
residue of it which one derives from colour, form, sound, and thought;
he believes that the more subtle, attenuated, and volatile, a thing
or a man becomes, the more valuable he becomes: the less real, the
greater the worth. This is Platonism: but Plato was guilty of yet
further audacity in the matter of turning tables--he measured the
degree of reality according to the degree of value, and said: The more
there is of "idea" the more there is of Being. He twisted the concept
"reality" round and said: "What ye regard as real is an error, and the
nearer we get to the 'idea' the nearer we are to 'truth.'"--Is this
understood? It was the greatest of all rechristenings: and because
Christianity adopted it, we are blind to its astounding features. At
bottom, Plato, like the artist he was, placed appearance before
Being! and therefore lies and fiction before truth! unreality before
actuality!--He was, however, so convinced of the value of appearance,
that he granted it the attributes of "Being," "causality," "goodness,"
and "truth," and, in short, all those things which are associated with
value.

The concept value itself regarded as a cause: first standpoint.

The ideal granted all attributes, conferring honour: second standpoint.

The idea of the "true world" or of "God" as absolutely spiritual,
intellectual, and good, is an emergency measure to the extent to
which the antagonistic instincts are all-powerful....

Moderation and existing humanity is reflected exactly in the
humanisation of the gods. The Greeks of the strongest period, who
entertained no fear whatever of themselves, but on the contrary were
pleased with themselves, brought down their gods to all their emotions.

The spiritualisation of the idea of God is thus very far from being a
sign of progress: one is heartily conscious of this when one reads
Goethe--in his works the vaporisation of God into virtue and spirit is
felt as being upon a lower plane.

The nonsense of all metaphysics shown to reside in the derivation of
the conditioned out of the unconditioned.

It belongs to the nature of thinking that it adds the unconditioned to
the conditioned, that it invents it--just as it thought of and invented
the "ego" to cover the multifariousness of its processes i it measures
the world according to a host of self-devised measurements--according
to its fundamental fictions "the unconditioned," "end and means,"
"things," "substances," and according to logical laws, figures, and
forms.

There would be nothing which could be called knowledge, if thought did
not first so re-create the world into "things" which are in its own
image. It is only through thought that there is untruth.

The origin of thought, like that of feelings, cannot be traced:
but that is no proof of its primordiality or absoluteness! It simply
shows that we cannot get behind it, because we have nothing else save
thought and feeling.

To know is to point to past experience: in its nature it is a
regressus in infinitum. That which halts (in the face of a so-called
causa prima or the unconditioned, etc.) is laziness, weariness.

Concerning the psychology of metaphysics--the influence of fear. That
which has been most feared, the cause of the greatest suffering (lust
of power, voluptuousness, etc.), has been treated with the greatest
amount of hostility by men, and eliminated from the "real" world. Thus
the passions have been step by step struck out, God posited as
the opposite of evil--that is to say, reality is conceived to be the
negation of the passions and the emotions (i.e. nonentity).

Irrationality, impulsive action, accidental action, is, moreover,
hated by them (as the cause of incalculable suffering). Consequently
they denied this element in the absolute, and interpreted it as
absolute "rationality" and "conformity of means to ends."

Change and perishability were also feared; and by this fear an
oppressed soul is revealed, full of distrust and painful experiences
(the case with Spinoza: a man differently constituted would have
regarded this change as a charm).

A nature overflowing and playing with energy, would call precisely
the passions, irrationality and change, good in a eudemonistic
sense, together with their consequences: danger, contrast, ruin, etc.

Against the value of that which always remains the same (remember
Spinoza's artlessness and Descartes' likewise), the value of the
shortest and of the most perishable, the seductive flash of gold on the
belly of the serpent vita----

Moral values in epistemology itself:--

The faith in reason--why not mistrust?

The "real world" is the good world--why?

Appearance, change, contradiction, struggle, regarded as
immoral: the desire for a world which knows nothing of
these things.

The transcendental world discovered, so that a place may
be kept for "moral freedom" (as in Kant).

Dialectics as the road to virtue (in Plato and Socrates:
probably because sophistry was held to be the road to
immorality).

Time and space are ideal: consequently there is unity in
the essence of things; consequently no sin, no evil, no
imperfection, a justification of God.

Epicurus denied the possibility of knowledge, in order to
keep the moral (particularly the hedonistic) values as the
highest.

Augustine does the same, and later Pascal ("corrupted
reason"), in favour of Christian values.

Descartes' contempt for everything variable; likewise
Spinoza's.

Concerning the psychology of metaphysics.--This world is only
apparent: therefore there must be a real world;--this world is
conditioned: consequently there must be an unconditioned world;--this
world is contradictory: consequently there is a world free from
contradiction;--this world is evolving: consequently there is
somewhere a static world:--a host of false conclusions (blind faith
in reason: if A exists, then its opposite B must also exist). Pain
inspires these conclusions: at bottom they are withes that such
a world might exist; the hatred of a world which leads to suffering
is likewise revealed by the fact that another and better world is
imagined: the resentment of the metaphysician against reality is
creative here.

The second series of questions: wherefore suffer? ... and from
this a conclusion is derived concerning the relation of the real
world to our apparent, changing, suffering, and contradictory world:
Suffering as the consequence of error: how is error possible?
Suffering as the consequence of guilt: how is guilt possible?
(A host of experiences drawn from the sphere of nature or society,
universalised and made absolute.) But if the conditioned world be
causally determined by the unconditioned, then the freedom to err, to
be sinful, must also be derived from the same quarter: and once more
the question arises, to what purpose? ... The world of appearance, of
Becoming, of contradiction, of suffering, is therefore willed; to what
purpose?

The error of these conclusions; two contradictory concepts are
formed--because one of them corresponds to a reality, the other
"must" also correspond to a reality. "Whence" would one otherwise
derive its contradictory concept? Reason is thus a source of
revelation concerning the absolute.

But the origin of the above contradictions need not necessarily be
a supernatural source of reason: it is sufficient to oppose the real
genesis of the concepts, this springs from practical spheres, from
utilitarian spheres, hence the strong faith it commands (one is
threatened with ruin if one's conclusions are not in conformity with
this reason; but this fact is no "proof" of what the latter asserts).

The preoccupation of metaphysicians with pain, is quite artless.
"Eternal blessedness": psychological nonsense. Brave and creative men
never make pleasure and pain ultimate questions--they are incidental
conditions: both of them must be desired when one will attain to
something. It is a sign of fatigue and illness in these metaphysicians
and religious men, that they should press questions of pleasure and
pain into the foreground. Even morality in their eyes derives its
great importance only from the fact that it is regarded as an
essential condition for abolishing pain.

The same holds good of the preoccupation with appearance and error
the cause of pain. A superstition that happiness and truth are related
(confusion: happiness in "certainty," in "faith").

To what extent are the various epistemological positions
(materialism, sensualism, idealism) consequences of valuations? The
source of the highest feelings of pleasure ("feelings of value") may
also judge concerning the problem of reality!

The measure of positive knowledge is quite a matter of indifference
and beside the point; as witness the development of Indici.

The Buddhistic negation of reality in general (appearance pain) is
perfectly consistent: undemonstrability, inaccessibility, lack of
categories, not only for an "absolute world," but a recognition of
the erroneous procedures by means of which the whole concept has
been reached. "Absolute reality," "Being in itself," a contradiction.
In a world of Becoming, reality is merely a simplification for
the purpose of practical ends, or a deception resulting from the
coarseness of certain organs, or a variation in the tempo of Becoming.

The logical denial of the world and Nihilism is a consequence of the
fact that we must oppose nonentity with Being, and that Becoming is
denied. ("Something" becomes.)

Being and Becoming.--"Reason" developed upon a sensualistic basis
upon the prejudices of the senses--that is to say, with the belief in
the truth of the judgment of the senses.

"Being," as the generalisation of the concept "Life" (breath), "to be
animate," "to will," "to act upon," "become."

The opposite is: "to be inanimate," "not to become," "not to will."
Thus: "Being" is not opposed to "not-Being," to "appearance," nor
is it opposed to death (for only that can be dead which can also live).

The "soul," the "ego," posited as primeval facts; and introduced
wherever there is Becoming.

Being--we have no other idea of it than that which we derive from
"living."--How then can everything "be" dead?

I see with astonishment that science resigns itself to-day to the fate
of being reduced to the world of appearance: we certainly have no organ
of knowledge for the real world--be it what it may.

At this point we may well ask: With what organ of knowledge is this
contradiction established?...

The fact that a world which is accessible to our organs is also
understood to be dependent upon these organs, and the fact that we
should understand a world as subjectively conditioned, are no proofs
of the actual possibility of an objective world. Who urges us to
believe that subjectivity is real or essential?

The absolute is even an absurd concept: an "absolute mode of existence"
is nonsense, the concept "being," "thing," is always relative to us.

The trouble is that, owing to the old antithesis "apparent" and "real,"
the correlative valuations "of little value" and "absolutely valuable"
have been spread abroad.

The world of appearance does not strike us as a "valuable" world;
appearance is on a lower plane than the highest value. Only a "real"
world can be absolutely "valuable"....

Prejudice of prejudices! It is perfectly possible in itself that
the real nature of things would be so unfriendly, so opposed to the
first conditions of life, that appearance is necessary in order to
make life possible.... This is certainly the case in a large number of
situations--for instance, marriage.

Our empirical world would thus be conditioned, even in its limits
to knowledge, by the instinct of self-preservation, we regard that
as good, valuable, and true, which favours the preservation of the
species....

We have no categories which allow us to distinguish between a
real and an apparent world. (At the most, there could exist a world of
appearance, but not our world of appearance.)

Taking the real world for granted, it might still be the less
valuable to us; for the quantum of illusion might be of the highest
order, owing to its value to us as a preservative measure. (Unless
appearance in itself were sufficient to condemn anything?)

That there exists a correlation between the degrees of value
and the degrees of reality (so that the highest values also possessed
the greatest degree of reality), is a metaphysical postulate which
starts out with the hypothesis that we know the order of rank among
values; and that this order is a moral one. It is only on this
hypothesis that truth is necessary as a definition of all that is of
a superior value.

It is of cardinal importance that the real world should be
suppressed. It is the most formidable inspirer of doubts, and
depredator of values, concerning the world which we are: it was our
most dangerous attempt heretofore on the life of Life.

War against all the hypotheses upon which a real world has been
imagined. The notion that moral values are the highest values,
belongs to this hypothesis.

The superiority of the moral valuation would be refuted, if it could
be shown to be the result of an immoral valuation--a specific case
of real immorality: it would thus reduce itself to an appearance,
and as an appearance it would cease from having any right to condemn
appearance.

Then the "Will to Truth" would have to be examined psychologically: it
is not a moral power, but a form of the Will to Power. This would have
to be proved by the fact that it avails itself of every immoral means
there is; above all, of the metaphysicians.

At the present moment we are face to face with the necessity of testing
the assumption that moral values are the highest values, Method in
research is attained only when all moral prejudices have been
overcome: it represents a conquest over morality....

The aberrations of philosophy are the outcome of the fact that,
instead of recognising in logic and the categories of reason merely
a means to the adjustment of the world for utilitarian ends (that is
to say, especially, a useful falsification), they were taken to be
the criterion of truth--particularly of reality. The "criterion
of truth" was, as a matter of fact, merely the biological utility
of a systematic falsification of this sort, on principle: and,
since a species of animals knows nothing more important than its own
preservation, it was indeed allowable here to speak of "truth." Where
the artlessness came in, however, was in taking this anthropocentric
idiosyncrasy as the measure of things, as the canon for recognising
the "real" and the "unreal": in short, in making a relative thing
absolute. And behold, all at once, the world fell into the two halves,
"real" and "apparent": and precisely that world which man's reason had
arranged for him to live and to settle in, was discredited. Instead of
using the forms as mere instruments for making the world manageable
and calculable, the mad fancy of philosophers intervened, and saw that
in these categories the concept of that world is given which does
not correspond to the concept of the world in which man lives.... The
means were misunderstood as measures of value, and even used as a
condemnation of their original purpose....

The purpose was, to deceive one's self in a useful way: the means
thereto was the invention of forms and signs, with the help of which
the confusing multifariousness of life could be reduced to a useful and
wieldy scheme.

But woe! a moral category was now brought into the game: no creature
would deceive itself, no creature may deceive itself--consequently
there is only a will to truth. What is "truth"?

The principle of contradiction provided the scheme: the real world to
which the way is being sought cannot be in contradiction with itself,
cannot change, cannot evolve, has no beginning and no end.

That is the greatest error which has ever been committed, the really
fatal error of the world: it was believed that in the forms of reason a
criterion of reality had been found--whereas their only purpose was to
master reality, by misunderstanding it intelligently....

And behold, the world became false precisely owing to the qualities
which constitute its reality, namely, change, evolution,
multifariousness, contrast, contradiction, war. And thenceforward the
whole fatality was there.

How does one get rid of the false and merely apparent world? (it was
the real and only one).

How does one become one's self as remote as possible from the
world of appearance? (the concept of the perfect being as a contrast
to the real being; or, more correctly still, as the contradiction of
life....).

The whole direction of values was towards the slander of life; people
deliberately confounded ideal dogmatism with knowledge in general: so
that the opposing parties also began to reject science with horror.

Thus the road to science was doubly barred: first, by the belief
in the real world; and secondly, by the opponents of this belief.
Natural science and psychology were (1) condemned in their objects, (2)
deprived of their artlessness....

Everything is so absolutely bound and related to everything else in
the real world, that to condemn, or to think away anything, means to
condemn and think away the whole. The words "this should not be," "this
ought not to be," are a farce.... If one imagines the consequences,
one would ruin the very source of Life by suppressing everything which
is in any sense whatever dangerous or destructive. Physiology proves
this much better!

We see how morality (a) poisons the whole concept of the world, (b)
cuts off the way to science, (c) dissipates and undermines all real
instincts (by teaching that their root is immoral).

We thus perceive a terrible tool of decadence at work, which succeeds
in remaining immune, thanks to the holy names and holy attitudes it
assumes.

The awful recovery of our consciousness: not of the individual, but
of the human species. Let us reflect; let us think backwards; let us
follow the narrow and broad highway.

Man seeks "the truth": a world that does not contradict itself,
that does not deceive, that does not change, a real world--a
world in which there is no suffering: contradiction, deception,
variability---the causes of suffering! He does not doubt that there is
such a thing as a world as it ought to be; he would fain find a road to
it. (Indian criticism: even the ego is apparent and not real.)

Whence does man derive the concept of reality? --Why does he make
variability, deception, contradiction, the origin of suffering; why
not rather of his happiness? ...

The contempt and hatred of all that perishes, changes, and varies:
whence comes this valuation of stability? Obviously, the will to truth
is merely the longing for a stable world.

The senses deceive; reason corrects the errors: therefore, it was
concluded, reason is the road to a static state; the most spiritual
ideas must be nearest to the "real world."--It is from the senses that
the greatest number of misfortunes come they are cheats, deluders, and
destroyers.

Happiness can be promised only by Being: change and happiness exclude
each other. The loftiest desire is thus to be one with Being. That is
the formula for the way to happiness.

In summa: The world as it ought to be exists; this world in which
we live is an error--this our world should not exist.

The belief in Being shows itself only as a result: the real primum
mobile is the disbelief in Becoming, the mistrust of Becoming, the
scorn of all Becoming....

What kind of a man reflects in this way? An unfruitful, suffering
kind, a world-weary kind. If we try and fancy what the opposite kind
of man would be like, we have a picture of a creature who would not
require the belief in Being; he would rather despise it as dead,
tedious, and indifferent....

The belief that the world which ought to be, is, really exists, is a
belief proper to the unfruitful, who do not wish to create a world as
it should be. They take it for granted, they seek for means and ways
of attaining to it. "The will to truth"--is the impotence of the will
to create.

To recognise that something Antagonism in
is thus or thus: the degrees of
To act so that something will energy in
be thus or thus: various natures.

The fiction of a world which corresponds to our desires; psychological
artifices and interpretations calculated to associate all that we
honour and regard as pleasant, with this real world.

"The will to truth" at this stage is essentially the art of
interpretation: to which also belongs that interpretation which still
possesses strength.

The same species of men, grown one degree poorer, no longer possessed
of the power to interpret and to create fictions, produces the
Nihilists. A Nihilist is the man who says of the world as it is,
that it ought not to exist, and of the world as it ought to be, that
it does not exist. According to this, existence (action, suffering,
willing, and feeling) has no sense: the pathos of the "in vain" is the
Nihilist's pathos--and as pathos it is moreover an inconsistency on
the part of the Nihilist.

He who is not able to introduce his will into things, the man without
either will or energy, at least invests them with some meaning, i.e.
he believes that a will is already in them.

The degree of a man's will-power may be measured from the extent to
which he can dispense with the meaning in things, from the extent to
which he is able to endure a world without meaning: because he himself
arranges a small portion of it.

The philosophical objective view of things may thus be a sign of
poverty both of will and of energy. For energy organises what is
closest and next; the "scientists," whose only desire is to ascertain
what exists, are such as cannot arrange things as they ought to be.

The artists, an intermediary species, they at least set up a symbol
of what should exist,--they are productive inasmuch as they actually
alter and transform; not like the scientists, who leave everything as
it is.

The connection between philosophers and the pessimistic religions;
the same species of man (they attribute the highest degree of
reality to the things which are valued highest).

The connection between philosophers and moral men and their
evaluations (the moral interpretation of the world as the sense of
the world: after the collapse of the religious sense).

The overcoming of philosophers by the annihilation of the world of
being: intermediary period of Nihilism; before there is sufficient
strength present to transvalue values, and to make the world of
becoming, and of appearance, the only world to be deified and called
good.

Nihilism as a normal phenomenon may be a symptom of increasing
strength or of increasing weakness:--

Partly owing to the fact that the strength to create and to will
has grown to such an extent, that it no longer requires this collective
interpretation and introduction of a sense ("present duties," state,
etc.);

Partly owing to the fact that even the creative power necessary
to invent sense, declines, and disappointment becomes the ruling
condition. The inability to believe in a sense becomes "unbelief."

What is the meaning of science in regard to both possibilities?

It is a sign of strength and self-control; it shows an ability to
dispense with healing, consoling worlds of illusion.

It is also able to undermine, to dissect, to disappoint, and to
weaken.

The belief in truth, the need of holding to something which is
believed to be true: psychological reduction apart from the valuations
that have existed hitherto. Fear and laziness.

At the same time unbelief: Reduction. In what way does it acquire a
new value, if a real world does not exist at all (by this means the
capacity of valuing, which hitherto has been lavished upon the world
of being, becomes free once more).

The real and the "apparent" world.

The erroneous concepts which proceed from this concept are of three
kinds:--

An unknown world:--we are adventurers, we are inquisitive,--that
which is known to us makes us weary (the danger of the concept lies in
the fact it suggests that "this" world is known to us....);

Another world, where things are different:--something in us draws
comparisons, and thereby our calm submission and our silence lose their
value--perhaps all will be for the best, we have not hoped in vain....
The world where things are different--who knows?--where we ourselves
will be different....

A real world:--that is the most singular blow and attack
which we have ever received; so many things have become encrusted in
the word "true," that we involuntarily give these to the "real world";
the real world must also be a truthful world, such a one as would
not deceive us or make fools of us; to believe in it in this way is to
be almost forced to believe (from convention, as is the case among
people worthy of confidence).

The concept, "the unknown world," suggests that this world is known
to us (is tedious);

The concept, "the other world," suggests that this world might be
different, it suppresses necessity and fate (it is useless to submit
and to adapt one's self);

The concept, the true world, suggests that this world is
untruthful, deceitful, dishonest, not genuine, and not essential,
and consequently not a world calculated to be useful to us (it is
unadvisable to become adapted to it; better resist it).

Thus we escape from "this" world in three different ways:----

With our curiosity--as though the interesting part was
somewhere else;

With our submission--as though it was not necessary to submit,
as though this world was not an ultimate necessity;

With our sympathy and respect--as though this world did not
deserve them, as though it was mean and dishonest towards us....

In summa: we have become revolutionaries in three different ways; we
have made x our criticism of the "known world."

The first step to reason: to understand to what extent we have been
seduced,--for it might be precisely the reverse:

The unknown world could be so constituted as to give us a
liking for "this" world--it may be a more stupid and meaner form of
existence.

The other world, very far from taking account of our desires
which were never realised here, might be part of the mass of things
which this world makes possible for us; to learn to know this world
would be a means of satisfying us,

The true world: but who actually says that the apparent world
must be of less value than the true world? Do not our instincts
contradict this judgment? Is not man eternally occupied in creating an
imaginative world, because he will have a better world than reality?
In the first place, how do we know that our world is not the
true world? ... for it might be that the other world is the world of
"appearance" (as a matter of fact, the Greeks, for instance, actually
imagined a region of shadows, a life of appearance, beside real
existence). And finally, what right have we to establish degrees of
reality, as it were? That is something different from an unknown
world--that is already the will to know something of the unknown. The
"other," the "unknown" world--good! but to speak of the "true world" is
as good as "knowing something about it,"--that is the contrary of
the assumption of an x-world....

In short, the world x might be in every way a more tedious, a more
inhuman, and a less dignified world than this one.

It would be quite another matter if it were assumed that there were
several x-worlds--that is to say, every possible kind of world
besides our own. But this has never been assumed....

Problem: why has the image of the other world always been to the
disadvantage of "this" one--that is to say, always stood as a criticism
of it; what does this point to?--

A people that are proud of themselves, and who are on the ascending
path of Life, always; picture another existence as lower and less
valuable than theirs; they regard the strange unknown world as their
enemy, as their opposite; they feel no curiosity, but rather repugnance
in regard to what is strange to them.... Such a body of men would never
admit that another people were the "true people"....

The very fact that such a distinction is possible,--that this world
should be called the world of appearance, and that the other should be
called the true world,--is symptomatic.

The places of origin of the idea, of "another world":

The philosopher who invents a rational world where reason
and logical functions are adequate:--this is the root of
the "true" world.

The religious man who invents a "divine world";--this is the
root of the "denaturalised" and the "anti-natural" world.

The moral man who invents a "free world":--this is the root
of the good, the perfect, the just, and the holy world.

The common factor in the three places of origin: psychological
error, physiological confusion.

With what attributes is the "other world," as it actually appears in
history, characterised? With the stigmata of philosophical, religious,
and moral prejudices.

The "other world" as it appears in the light of these facts, is
synonymous with not-Being, with not-living, with the will not to
live....

General aspect: it was the instinct of the fatigue of living, and
not that of life, which created the "other world."

Result: philosophy, religion, and morality are symptoms of
decadence.

The Biological Value of Knowledge.

It might seem as though I had evaded the question concerning
"certainty". The reverse is true: but while raising the question of the
criterion of certainty, I wished to discover the weights and measures
with which men had weighed heretofore--and to show that the question
concerning certainty is already in itself a dependent question, a
question of the second rank.

The question of values is more fundamental than the question of
certainty: the latter only becomes serious once the question of values
has been answered.

Being and appearance, regarded psychologically, yield no "Being in
itself," no criterion for reality, but only degrees of appearance,
measured according to the strength of the sympathy which we feel for
appearance.

There is no struggle for existence between ideas and observations,
but only a struggle for supremacy--the vanquished idea is not
annihilated, but only driven to the background or subordinated.
There is no such thing as annihilation in intellectual spheres.

"End and means"
"Cause and effect"
"Subject and object"
"Action and suffering"
"Thing-in-itself and
appearance"

As interpretations (not as established facts)--and in what respect
were they perhaps necessary interpretations? (as "preservative
measures")--all in the sense of a Will to Power.

Our values are interpreted into the heart of things.

Is there, then, any sense in the absolute?

Is not sense necessarily relative-sense and perspective?

All sense is Will to Power (all relative senses may be identified with
it).

The desire for "established facts"--Epistemology: how much pessimism
there is in it!

The antagonism between the "true world," as pessimism depicts it, and
a world in which it were possible to live--for this the rights of
truth must be tested. It is necessary to measure all these "ideal
forces" according to the standard of life, in order to understand the
nature of that antagonism: the struggle of sickly, desperate life,
cleaving to a beyond, against healthier, more foolish, more false,
richer, and fresher life. Thus it is not "truth" struggling with Life,
but one kind of Life with another kind.--But the former would fain
be the higher kind!--Here we must prove that some order of rank is
necessary,--that the first problem is the order of rank among kinds of
Life.

The belief, "It is thus and thus," must be altered into the will,
"Thus and thus shall it be."

Science.

Science hitherto has been a means of disposing of the confusion of
things by hypotheses which "explain everything"--that is to say, it
has been the result of the intellect's repugnance to chaos. This
same repugnance takes hold of me when I contemplate myself; I
should like to form some kind of representation of my inner world
for myself by means of a scheme, and thus overcome intellectual
confusion. Morality was a simplification of this sort: it taught man as
recognised, as known,--Now we have annihilated morality--we have
once more grown completely obscure to ourselves! I know that I know
nothing about myself. Physics shows itself to be a boon for the
mind: science (as the road to knowledge) acquires a new charm after
morality has been laid aside--and owing to the fact that we find
consistency here alone, we must order our lives in accordance with
it so that it may help us to preserve it. This results in a sort of
practical meditation concerning the conditions of our existence as
investigators.

Our first principles: no God: no purpose: limited energy. We will take
good care to avoid thinking out and prescribing the necessary lines
of thought for the lower orders.

No "moral education" of humanity: but the disciplinary school of
scientific errors is necessary, because truth disgusts and creates a
dislike of life, provided a man is not already irrevocably launched
upon his way, and bears the consequences of his honest standpoint
with tragic pride.

The first principle of scientific work: faith in the union and
continuance of scientific work, so that the individual may undertake to
work at any point, however small, and feel sure that his efforts will
not be in vain.

There is a great paralysing force: to work in vain, to struggle in
vain.

The periods of hoarding, when energy and power are stored, to be
utilised later by subsequent periods: Science as a half-way house,
at which the mediocre, more multifarious, and more complicated beings
find their most natural gratification and means of expression: all
those who do well to avoid action.

A. philosopher recuperates his strength in a way quite his own, and
with other means: he does it, for instance, with Nihilism. The belief
that there is no such thing as truth, the Nihilistic belief, is a
tremendous relaxation for one who, as a warrior of knowledge, is
unremittingly struggling with a host of hateful truths. For truth is
ugly.

The "purposelessness of all phenomena": the belief in this is the
result of the view that all interpretations hitherto have been false,
it is a generalisation on the part of discouragement and weakness--it
is not a necessary belief.

The arrogance of man: when he sees no purpose, he denies that there
can be one!

The unlimited ways of interpreting the world: every interpretation is a
symptom of growth or decline.

Unity (monism) is a need of inertia; Plurality in interpretation is a
sign of strength. One should not desire to deprive the world of its
disquieting and enigmatical nature.

Against the desire for reconciliation and peaceableness. To this also
belongs every attempt on the part of monism.

This relative world, this world for the eye, the touch, and the
ear, is very false, even when adjusted to a much more sensitive
sensual apparatus. But its comprehensibility, its clearness, its
practicability, its beauty, will begin to near their end if we
refine our senses, just as beauty ceases to exist when the processes
of its history are reflected upon: the arrangement of the end is in
itself an illusion. Let it suffice, that the more coarsely and more
superficially it is understood, the more valuable, the more definite,
the more beautiful and important the world then seems. The more
deeply one looks into it, the further our valuation retreats from our
view,-senselessness approaches! We have created the world that has
any value! Knowing this, we also perceive that the veneration of truth
is already the result of illusion--and that it is much more necessary
to esteem the formative, simplifying, moulding, and romancing power.

"All is false--everything is allowed!"

Only as the result of a certain bluntness of vision and the desire for
simplicity does the beautiful and the "valuable" make its appearance:
in itself it is purely fanciful.

We know that the destruction of an illusion does not necessarily
produce a truth, but only one more piece of ignorance; it is the
extension of our "empty space," an increase in our "waste."

Of what alone can knowledge consist?--"Interpretation," the
introduction of a sense into things, not "explanation" (in the
majority of cases a new interpretation of an old interpretation which
has grown incomprehensible and little more than a mere sign). There
is no such thing as an established fact, everything fluctuates,
everything, is intangible, yielding; after all, the most lasting of all
things are our opinions.

The ascertaining of "truth" and "untruth," the ascertaining of facts
in general, is fundamentally different from the creative placing,
forming, moulding, subduing, and willing which lies at the root of
philosophy. To give a sense to things--this duty always remains
over, provided no sense already lies in them. The same holds good
of sounds, and also of the fate of nations they are susceptible of the
most varied interpretations and turns, for different purposes.

A higher duty is to fix a goal and to mould facts according to
it: that is, the interpretation of action, and not merely a
transvaluation of concepts.

Man ultimately finds nothing more in things than he himself has laid
in them--this process of finding again is science, the actual process
of laying a meaning in things, is art, religion, love, pride. In both,
even if they are child's play, one should show good courage and one
should plough ahead; on the one hand, to find again, on the other,--we
are the other,--to lay a sense in things.

Science: its two sides:--

In regard to the individual;

In regard to the complex of culture ("levels of culture")

--antagonistic valuation in regard to this and that side.

The development of science tends ever more to transform the known into
the unknown: its aim, however, is to do the reverse, and it starts
out with the instinct of tracing the unknown to the known.

In short, science is laying the road to sovereign ignorance, to a
feeling that "knowledge" does not exist at all, that it was merely a
form of haughtiness to dream of such a thing; further, that we have not
preserved the smallest notion which would allow us to class knowledge
even as a possibility that "knowledge" is a contradictory idea. We
transfer a primeval myth and piece of human vanity into the land
of hard facts: we can allow a thing-in-itself as a concept, just
as little as we can allow "knowledge-in-itself." The misleading
influence of "numbers and logic," the misleading influence of "laws."

Wisdom is an attempt to overcome the perspective valuations (i.e.
the "will to power"): it is a principle which is both unfriendly to
Life, and also decadent; a symptom in the case of the Indians, etc.;
weakness of the power of appropriation.

It does not suffice for you to see in what ignorance man and beast now
live; you must also have and learn the desire for ignorance. It
is necessary that you should know that without this form of ignorance
life itself would be impossible, that it is merely a vital condition
under which, alone, a living organism can preserve itself and prosper:
a great solid belt of ignorance must stand about you.

Science--the transformation of Nature into concepts for the purpose of
governing Nature--that is part of the rubric means.

But the purpose and will of mankind must grow in the same way, the
intention in regard to the whole.

Thought is the strongest and most persistently exercised function in
all stages of life--and also in every act of perception or apparent
experience! Obviously it soon becomes the mightiest and most
exacting of all functions, and in time tyrannises over other powers.
Ultimately it becomes "passion in itself."

The right to great passion must be reclaimed for the investigator,
after self-effacement and the cult of "objectivity" have created a
false order of rank in this sphere. Error reached its zenith when
Schopenhauer taught: in the release from passion and in will alone
lay the road to "truth," to knowledge; the intellect freed from will
could not help seeing the true and actual essence of things. The same
error in art: as if everything became beautiful the moment it was
regarded without will.

The contest for supremacy among the passions, and the dominion of one
of the passions over the intellect.

To "humanise" the world means to feel ourselves ever more and more
masters upon earth.

Knowledge, among a higher class of beings, will also take new forms
which are not yet necessary.

That the worth of the world lies in our interpretations (that perhaps
yet other interpretations are possible somewhere, besides mankind's);
that the interpretations made hitherto were perspective valuations,
by means of which we were able to survive in life, i.e. in the
Will to Power and in the growth of power; that every elevation of
man involves the overcoming of narrower interpretations; that every
higher degree of strength or power attained, brings new views in its
train, and teaches a belief in new horizons--these doctrines lie
scattered through all my works. The world that concerns us at all is
false--that is to say, is not a fact; but a romance, a piece of human
sculpture, made from a meagre sum of observation; it is "in flux"; it
is something that evolves, a great revolving lie continually moving
onwards and never getting any nearer to truth--for there is no such
thing as "truth."

Recapitulation:--

To stamp Becoming with the character of Being--this is the highest
Will to Power.

The twofold falsification, by the senses on the one hand, by the
intellect on the other, with the view of maintaining a world of being,
of rest, of equivalent cases, etc.

That everything recurs, is the very nearest approach of a world of
Becoming to a world of Being, the height of contemplation.

It is out of the values which have been attributed to Being, that the
condemnation of, and dissatisfaction with, Becoming, have sprung: once
such a world of Being had been invented.

The metamorphoses of Being (body, God, ideas, natural laws, formulae,
etc.).

"Being" as appearance the twisting round of values: appearance was that
which conferred the values.

Knowledge in itself in a world of Becoming is impossible; how can
knowledge be possible at all, then? Only as a mistaking of one's self,
as will to power, as will to deception.

Becoming is inventing, willing, self-denying, self-overcoming; no
subject but an action, it places things, it is creative, no "causes and
effects."

Art is the will to overcome Becoming, it is a process of eternalising,
but short-sighted, always according to the perspective, repeating, as
it were in a small way, the tendency of the whole.

That which all life shows, is to be regarded as a reduced formula for
the collective tendency: hence the new definition of the concept "Life"
as "will to power."

Instead of "cause and effect," the struggle of evolving factors with
one another, frequently with the result that the opponent is absorbed;
no constant number for Becoming.

The uselessness of old ideals for the interpretation of all that takes
place, once their bestial origin and utility have been recognised, they
are, moreover, all hostile to life.

The uselessness of the mechanical theory--it gives the impression that
there can be no purpose.

All the idealism of mankind, hitherto, is on the point of
turning into Nihilism--may be shown to be a belief in absolute
worthlessness, i.e. purposelessness.

The annihilation of ideals, the new desert waste the new arts which
will help us to endure it--amphibia that we are!

First principles, bravery, patience, no "stepping-back," not too much
ardour to get to the fore. (N.B.--Zarathustra constantly maintaining
an attitude of parody towards all former values, as the result of his
overflowing energy.)

II.

THE WILL TO POWER IN NATURE.

The Mechanical Interpretation of the World.

Of all the interpretations of the world attempted heretofore, the
mechanical one seems to-day to stand most prominently in the front.
Apparently it has a clean conscience on its side; for no science
believes inwardly in progress and success unless it be with the help
of mechanical procedures. Every one knows these procedures: "reason"
and "purpose" are allowed to remain out of consideration as far as
possible; it is shown that, provided a sufficient amount of time be
allowed to elapse, everything can evolve out of everything else, and no
one attempts to suppress his malicious satisfaction, when the "apparent
design in the fate" of a plant or of the yolk of an egg, may be traced
to stress and thrust in short, people are heartily glad to pay respect
to this principle of profoundest stupidity, if I may be allowed to pass
a playful remark concerning these serious matters. Meanwhile, among the
most select intellects to be found in this movement, some presentiment
of evil, some anxiety is noticeable, as if the theory had a rent in it,
which sooner or later might be its last: I mean the sort of rent which
denotes the end of all balloons inflated with such theories.

Stress and thrust themselves cannot be "explained," one cannot get rid
of the actio in distans. The belief even in the ability to explain is
now lost, and people peevishly admit that one can only describe, not
explain that the dynamic interpretation of the world, with its denial
of "empty space" and its little agglomerations of atoms, will soon get
the better of physicists: although in this way Dynamis is certainly
granted an inner quality.

The triumphant concept "energy" with which our physicists created
God and the world, needs yet to be completed: it must be given an
inner will which I characterise as the "Will to Power"--that is to
say, as an insatiable desire to manifest power; or the application and
exercise of power as a creative instinct, etc. Physicists cannot get
rid of the "actio in distans" in their principles; any more than they
can a repelling force (or an attracting one). There is no help for it,
all movements, all "appearances," all "laws" must be understood as
symptoms of an inner phenomenon, and the analogy of man must be
used for this purpose. It is possible to trace all the instincts of an
animal to the will to power; as also all the functions of organic life
to this one source.

Has anybody ever been able to testify to a force! No, but to
effects, translated into a completely strange language. Regularity in
sequence has so spoilt us, that we no longer wonder at the wonderful
process.

A force of which we cannot form any idea, is an empty word, and ought
to have no civic rights in the city of science: and the same applies to
the purely mechanical powers of attracting and repelling by means of
which we can form an image of the world--no more!

Squeezes and kicks are something incalculably recent, evolved and
not primeval. They presuppose something which holds together and can
press and strike! But how could it hold together?

There is nothing unalterable in chemistry: this is only appearance,
a mere school prejudice. We it was who introduced the unalterable,
taking it from metaphysics as usual, Mr. Chemist. It is a mere
superficial judgment to declare that the diamond, graphite, and carbon
are identical. Why? Simply because no loss of substance can be traced
in the scales! Well then, at least they have something in common; but
the work of the molecules in the process of changing from one form to
the other, an action we can neither see nor weigh, is just exactly what
makes one material something different--with specifically different
qualities.

Against the physical atom.--In order to understand the world, we
must be able to reckon it up; in order to be able to reckon it up, we
must be aware of constant causes; but since we find no such constant
causes in reality, we invent them for ourselves and call them atoms.
This is the origin of the atomic theory.

The possibility of calculating the world, the possibility of expressing
all phenomena by means of formulae--is that really "understanding"? What
would be understood of a piece of music, if all that were calculable in
it and capable of being expressed in formulas, were reckoned up?--Thus
"constant causes", things, substances, something "unconditioned," were
therefore invented;--what has been attained thereby?

The mechanical concept of "movement" is already a translation of the
original process into the language of symbols of the eye and the
touch.

The concept atom, the distinction between the "seat of a motive force
and the force itself," is a language of symbols derived from our
logical and physical world.

It does not lie within our power to alter our means of expression:
it is possible to understand to what extend they are but symptomatic.
To demand an adequate means of expression is nonsense: it lies at
the heart of a language, of a medium of communication, to express
relation only.... The concept "truth" is opposed to good sense.
The whole province of truth--falseness only applies to the relations
between beings, not to an "absolute." There is no such thing as a
"being in itself" (relations in the first place constitute being),
any more than there can be "knowledge in itself."

"The feeling of force cannot proceed from movement: feeling in
general cannot proceed from movement."

"Even in support of this, an apparent experience is the only evidence:
in a substance (brain) feeling is generated through transmitted motion
(stimuli). But generated? Would this show that the feeling did not
yet exist there at all? so that its appearance would have to
be regarded as the creative act of the intermediary--motion? The
feelingless condition of this substance is only an hypothesis! not an
experience! Feeling, therefore is the quality of the substance: there
actually are substances that feel."

"Do we learn from certain substances that they have no feeling? No,
we merely cannot tell that they have any. It is impossible to seek the
origin of feeling in non-sensitive substance."--Oh what hastiness!

"To attract" and "to repel", in a purely mechanical sense, is pure
fiction: a word. We cannot imagine an attraction without a purpose.--
Either the will to possess one's self of a thing, or the will to defend
one's self from a thing or to repel it--that we "understand"; that
would be an interpretation which we could use.

In short, the psychological necessity of believing in causality lies in
the impossibility of imagining a process without a purpose: but of
course this says nothing concerning truth or untruth (the justification
of such a belief)! The belief in causae collapses with the belief in
telei (against Spinoza and his causationism).

It is an illusion to suppose that something is known, when all
we have is a mathematical formula of what has happened; it is only
characterised, described; no more!

If I bring a regularly recurring phenomenon into a formula, I have
facilitated and shortened my task of characterising the whole
phenomenon, etc. But I have not thereby ascertained a "law," I have
only replied to the question: How is it that something recurs here? It
is a supposition that the formula corresponds to a complex of really
unknown forces and the discharge of forces; it is pure mythology to
suppose that forces here obey a law, so that, as the result of their
obedience, we have the same phenomenon every time.

I take good care not to speak of chemical "laws": to do so savours of
morality. It is much more a question of establishing certain relations
of power: the stronger becomes master of the weaker, in so far as the
latter cannot maintain its degree of independence,--here there is no
pity, no quarter, and, still less, any observance of "law."

The unalterable sequence of certain phenomena does not prove any "law,"
but a relation of power between two or more forces. To say, "But it
is precisely this relation that remains the same!" is no better than
saying, "One and the same force cannot be another force."--It is not a
matter of sequence, but a matter of interdependence, a process in
which the procession of moments do not determine each other after the
manner of cause and effect....

The separation of the "action" from the "agent"; of the phenomenon from
the worker of that phenomenon: of the process from one that is not
process, but lasting, substance, thing, body, soul, etc.; the attempt
to understand a life as a sort of shifting of things and a changing of
places; of a sort of "being" or stable entity: this ancient mythology
established the belief in "cause and effect," once it had found a
lasting form in the functions of speech and grammar.

The "regularity" of a sequence is only a metaphorical expression, not
a fact, just as if a rule were followed here! And the same holds
good of "conformity to law." We find a formula in order to express an
ever-recurring kind of succession of phenomena: but that does not show
that we have discovered a law; much less a force which is the cause
of a recurrence of effects. The fact that something always happens
thus or thus, is interpreted here as if a creature always acted thus
or thus as the result of obedience to a law or to a lawgiver: whereas
apart from the "law" it would be free to act differently. But precisely
that inability to act otherwise might originate in the creature itself,
it might be that it did not act thus or thus in response to a law,
but simply because it was so constituted. It would mean simply: that
something cannot also be something else; that it cannot be first this,
and then something quite different; that it is neither free nor the
reverse, but merely thus or thus. The fault lies in thinking a subject
into things.

To speak of two consecutive states, the first as "cause," and the
second as "effect," is false. The first state cannot bring about
anything, the second has nothing effected in it.

It is a question of a struggle between two elements unequal in power:
a new adjustment is arrived at, according to the measure of power each
possesses. The second state is something fundamentally different from
the first (it is not its effect): the essential thing Is, that the
factors which engage in the struggle leave it with different quanta of
power.

A. criticism of Materialism.--Let us dismiss the two popular
concepts, Necessity and Law, from this idea: the first introduces a
false constraint, the second a false liberty into the world. "Things"
do not act regularly, they follow no rule: there are no things (that
is our fiction); neither do they act in accordance with any necessity.
There is no obedience here: for, the fact that something is as it is,
strong or weak, is not the result of obedience or of a rule or of a
constraint....

The degree of resistance and the degree of superior power--this is the
question around which all phenomena turn: if we, for our own purposes
and calculations, know how to express this in formulas and "laws," all
the better for us! But that does not mean that we have introduced any
"morality" into the world, just because we have fancied it as obedient.

There are no laws: every power draws its last consequence at every
moment. Things are calculable precisely owing to the fact that there is
no possibility of their being otherwise than they are.

A quantum of power is characterised by the effect it produces
and the influence it resists. The adiaphoric state which would be
thinkable in itself, is entirely lacking. It is essentially a will to
violence and a will to defend one's self against violence. It is not
self-preservation: every atom exercises its influence over the whole of
existence--it is thought out of existence if one thinks this radiation
of will-power away. That is why I call it a quantum of "Will to
Power"; with this formula one can express the character which cannot
be abstracted in thought from mechanical order, without suppressing the
latter itself in thought.

The translation of the world of effect into a visible world--a world
for the eye--is the concept "movement." Here it is always understood
that something has been moved,--whether it be the fiction of an
atomic globule or even of the abstraction of the latter, the dynamic
atom, something is always imagined that has an effect--that is to say,
we have not yet rid ourselves of the habit into which our senses and
speech inveigled us. Subject and object, an agent to the action, the
action and that which does it separated: we must not forget that all
this signifies no more than semeiotics and--nothing real. Mechanics as
a teaching of movement is already a translation of phenomena into
man's language of the senses.

We are in need of "unities" in order to be able to reckon: but this is
no reason for supposing that "unities" actually exist. We borrowed
the concept "unity" from our concept "ego,"--our very oldest article
of faith. If we did not believe ourselves to be unities we should never
have formed the concept "thing." Now--that is to say, somewhat late in
the day, we are overwhelmingly convinced that our conception of the
concept "ego" is no security whatever for a real entity. In order to
maintain the mechanical interpretation of the world theoretically, we
must always make the reserve that it is with fictions that we do so:
the concept of movement (derived from the language of our senses)
and the concept of the atom (= entity, derived from our psychical
experience) are based upon a sense-prejudice and a psychological
prejudice.

Mechanics formulates consecutive phenomena, and it does so
semeiologically, in the terms of the senses and of the mind (that all
influence is movement; that where there is movement something is at
work moving): it does not touch the question of the causal force.

The mechanical world is imagined as the eye and the sense of touch
alone could imagine a world (as "moved"),--in such a way as to be
calculable,--as to simulate causal entities "things" (atoms) whose
effect is constant (the transfer of the false concept of subject to the
concept atom).

The mixing together of the concept of numbers, of the concept of thing
(the idea of subject), of the concept of activity (the separation of
that which is the cause, and the effect), of the concept of movement:
all these things are phenomenal; our eye and our psychology are still
in it all.

If we eliminate these adjuncts, nothing remains over but dynamic
quanta, in a relation of tension to all other dynamic quanta: the
essence of which resides in their relation to all other quanta, in
their "influence" upon the latter. The will to power, not Being, not
Becoming, but a pathos--is the elementary fact, from these first
results a Becoming, an influencing....

The physicists believe in a "true world" after their own kind; a
fixed systematising of atoms to perform necessary movements, and
holding good equally of all creatures, so that, according to them,
the "world of appearance" reduces itself to the side of general and
generally-needed Being, which is accessible to every one according to
his kind (accessible and also adjusted,--made "subjective"). But here
they are in error. The atom which they postulate is arrived at by the
logic of that perspective of consciousness; it is in itself therefore
a subjective fiction. This picture of the world which they project
is in no way essentially different from the subjective picture: the
only difference is, that it is composed simply with more extended
senses, but certainly with our senses.... And in the end, without
knowing it, they left something out of the constellation: precisely
the necessary perspective factor, by means of which every centre of
power--and not man alone--constructs the rest of the world from its
point of view--that is to say, measures it, feels it, and moulds it
according to its degree of strength.... They forgot to reckon with
this perspective-fixing power, in "true being,"--or, in school-terms,
subject-being. They suppose that this was "evolved" and added;--but
even the chemical investigator needs it: it is indeed specific Being,
which determines action and reaction according to circumstances.

Perspectivity is only a complex form, of specificness. My idea is
that every specific body strives to become master of all space, and to
extend its power (its will to power), and to thrust back everything
that resists it. But inasmuch as it is continually meeting the same
endeavours on the part of other bodies, it concludes by coming to terms
with those (by "combining" with those) which are sufficiently related
to it--and thus they conspire together for power. And the process
continues.

Even in the inorganic world all that concerns an atom of energy is its
immediate neighbourhood: distant forces balance each other. Here is
the root of perspectivity, and it explains why a living organism is
"egoistic" to the core.

Granting that the world disposed of a quantum of force, it is obvious
that any transposition of force to any place would affect the whole
system--thus, besides the causality of sequence, there would also be
a dependence, contiguity, and coincidence.

The only possible way of upholding the sense of the concept "God" would
be: to make Him not the motive force, but the condition of maximum
power, an epoch; a point in the further development of the Will to
Power; by means of which subsequent evolution just as much as former
evolution--up to Him--could be explained.

Viewed mechanically, the energy of collective Becoming remains
constant; regarded from the economical standpoint, it ascends
to its zenith and then recedes therefrom in order to remain
eternally rotatory. This "Will to Power" expresses itself in the
interpretation in the manner in which the strength is used.--The
conversion of energy into life; "life in its highest power"
thenceforward appears as the goal. The same amount of energy, at
different stages of development, means different things.

That which determines growth in Life is the economy which becomes ever
more sparing and methodical, which achieves ever more and more with a
steadily decreasing amount of energy.... The ideal is the principle of
the least possible expense....

The only thing that is proved is that the world is not striving
towards a state of stability. Consequently its zenith must not be
conceived as a state of absolute equilibrium....

The dire necessity of the same things happening in the course of the
world, as in all other things, is not an eternal determinism reigning
over all phenomena, but merely the expression of the fact that the
impossible is not possible; that a given force cannot be different
from that given force; that a given quantity of resisting force does
not manifest itself otherwise than in conformity with its degree of
strength;--to speak of events as being necessary is tautological.

The Will to Power as Life.

The Organic Process.

Man imagines that he was present at the generation of the organic
world: what was there to be observed, with the eyes and the touch,
in regard to these processes? How much of it can be put into round
numbers? What rules are noticeable in the movements? Thus, man would
fain arrange all phenomena as if they were for the eye and for the
touch, as if they were forms of motion: he will discover formules
wherewith to simplify the unwieldy mass of these experiences.

The reduction of all phenomena to the level of men with senses and
with mathematics. It is a matter of making an inventory of human
experiences: granting that man, or rather the human eye and the
ability to form concepts, have been the eternal witnesses of all
things.

A plurality of forces bound by a common nutritive process we call
"Life." To this nutritive process all so-called feeling, thinking,
and imagining belong as means--that is to say, (1) in the form of
opposing other forces; (2) in the form of an adjustment of other forces
according to mould and rhythm; (3) the form of a valuation relative to
assimilation and excretion.

The bond between the inorganic and the organic world must lie in the
repelling power exercised by every atom of energy. "Life" might be
defined as a lasting form of force-establishing processes, in which
the various contending forces, on their part, grow unequally. To what
extent does counter-strife exist even in obedience? Individual power is
by no means surrendered through it. In the same way, there exists in
the act of commanding, an acknowledgment of the fact that the absolute
power of the adversary has not been overcome, absorbed, or dissipated.
"Obedience," and "command," are forms of the game of war.

The Will to Power interprets (an organ in the process of formation
has to be interpreted): it defines, it determines gradations,
differences of power. Mere differences of power could not be aware of
each other as such: something must be there which will grow, and
which interprets all other things that would do the same, according to
the value of the latter. In sooth, all interpretation is but a means
in itself to become master of something. (Continual interpretation is
the first principle of the organic process.)

Greater complexity, sharp differentiation, the contiguity of the
developed organs and functions, with the disappearance of intermediate
members--if that is perfection, then there is a Will to Power
apparent in the organic process by means of whose dominating,
shaping, and commanding forces it is continually increasing the
sphere of its power, and persistently simplifying things within that
sphere, it grows imperatively.

"Spirit" is only a means and an instrument in the service of higher
life, in the service of the elevation of life.

"Heredity," as something quite incomprehensible, cannot be used
as an explanation, but only as a designation for the identification
of a problem. And the same holds good of "adaptability." As a
matter of fact, the account of morphology, even supposing it were
perfect, explains nothing, it merely describes an enormous fact.
How a given organ gets to be used for any particular purpose is not
explained. There is just as little explained in regard to these things
by the assumption of causae finales as by the assumption of causae
efficientes. The concept "causa" is only a means of expression, no
more; a means of designating a thing.

They are analogies; for instance, our memory may suggest another kind
of memory which makes itself felt in heredity, development, and forms.
Our inventive and experimentative powers suggest another kind of
inventiveness in the application of instruments to new ends, etc.

That which we call our "consciousness" is quite guiltless of any
of the essential processes of our preservation and growth; and no
human brain could be so subtle as to construct anything more than a
machine--to which every organic process is infinitely superior.

Against Darwinism.--The use of an organ does not explain its
origin, on the contrary! During the greater part of the time occupied
in the formation of a certain quality, this quality does not help to
preserve the individual; it is of no use to him, and particularly not
in his struggle with external circumstances and foes.

What is ultimately "useful"? It is necessary to ask, "Useful for what"?

For instance, that which promotes the lasting powers of the
individual might be unfavourable to his strength or his beauty; that
which preserves him might at the same time fix him and keep him stable
throughout development. On the other hand, a deficiency, a state of
degeneration, may be of the greatest possible use, inasmuch as it
acts as a stimulus to other organs. In the same way, a state of need
may be a condition of existence, inasmuch as it reduces an individual
to that modicum of means which, though it keeps him together, does
not allow him to squander his strength.--The individual himself is
the struggle of parts (for nourishment, space, etc.): his development
involves the triumph, the predominance, of isolated parts; the
wasting away, or the "development into organs," of other parts.

The influence of "environment" is nonsensically overrated in Darwin,
the essential factor in the process of life is precisely the tremendous
inner power to shape and to create forms, which merely uses, exploits
"environment."

The new forms built up by this inner power are not produced with a view
to any end; but, in the struggle between the parts, a new form does not
exist long without becoming related to some kind of semi-utility,
and, according to its use, develops itself ever more and more perfectly.

"Utility" in respect of the acceleration of the speed of evolution, is
a different kind of "utility" from that which is understood to mean the
greatest possible stability and staying power of the evolved creature.

"Useful" in the sense of Darwinian biology means: that which favours a
thing in its struggle with others. But in my opinion the feeling of
being surcharged, the feeling accompanying an increase in strength,
quite apart from the utility of the struggle, is the actual progress:
from these feelings the will to war is first derived.

Physiologists should bethink themselves before putting down the
instinct of self-preservation as the cardinal instinct of an organic
being. A living thing seeks above all to discharge its strength:
"self-preservation" is only one of the results thereof.--Let us
beware of superfluous teleological principles!--one of which is the
whole concept of "self-preservation."[4]

[Footnote 4: See Beyond Good and Evil, in this edition, Aph. 13.]

The most-fundamental--and most primeval activity of a protoplasm cannot
be ascribed to a will to self-preservation, for it absorbs an amount
of material which is absurdly out of proportion with the needs of its
preservation: and what is more, it does not "preserve itself" in the
process, but actually falls to pieces.... The instinct which rules
here, must account for this total absence in the organism of a desire
to preserve itself: hunger is already an interpretation based upon the
observation of a more or less complex organism (hunger is a specialised
and later form of the instinct; it is an expression of the system of
divided labour, in the service of a higher instinct which rules the
whole).

It is just as impossible to regard hunger as the primum mobile, as
it is to take self-preservation to be so. Hunger, considered as the
result of insufficient nourishment, means hunger as the result of a
will to power which can no longer dominate It is not a question of
replacing a loss, it is only later on, as the result of the division of
labour, when the Will to Power has discovered other and quite different
ways of gratifying itself, that the appropriating lust of the organism
is reduced to hunger--to the need of replacing what has been lost.

We can but laugh at the false "Altruism" of biologists: propagation
among the amoebae appears as a process of jetsam, as an advantage to
them. It is an excretion of useless matter.

The division of a protoplasm into two takes place when its power is
no longer sufficient to subjugate the matter it has appropriated:
procreation is the result of impotence.

In the cases in which the males seek the females and become one with
them, procreation is the result of hunger.

The weaker vessel is driven to the stronger from a need of nourishment;
it desires to get under it, if possible to become one with it. The
stronger, on the contrary, defends itself from others; it refuses to
perish in this way; it prefers rather to split itself into two or more
parts in the process of growing. One may conclude that the greater the
urgency seems to become one with something else, the more weakness in
some form is present. The greater the tendency to variety, difference,
inner decay, the more strength is actually to hand.

The instinct to cleave to something, and the instinct to repel
something, are in the inorganic as in the organic world, the uniting
bond. The whole distinction is a piece of hasty judgment.

The will to power in every combination of forces, defending itself
against the stronger and coming down unmercifully upon the weaker, is
more correct.

N. B. All processes may be regarded as "beings".

The will to power can manifest itself only against obstacles; it
therefore goes in search of what resists it--this is the primitive
tendency of the protoplasm when it extends its pseudopodia and feels
about it. The act of appropriation and assimilation is, above all, the
result of a desire to overpower, a process of forming, of additional
building and rebuilding, until at last the subjected creature has
become completely a part of the superior creature's sphere of power,
and has increased the latter.--If this process of incorporation
does not succeed, then the whole organism falls to pieces; and the
separation occurs as the result of the will to power: in order to
prevent the escape of that which has been subjected, the will to power
falls into two wills (under some circumstances without even abandoning
completely its relation to the two).

"Hunger" is only a more narrow adaptation, once the fundamental
instinct of power has won power of a more abstract kind.

What is "passive"?

To be hindered in the outward movement of grasping: it is
thus an act of resistance and reaction.

What is "active"?

To stretch out for power.

"Nutrition"...

Is only a derived phenomenon; the primitive form of it was
the will to stuff everything inside one's own skin.

"Procreation"...

Only derived; originally, in those cases In which one
will was unable to organise the collective mass it had
appropriated, an opposing will came into power, which
undertook to effect the separation and establish a new
centre of organisation, after a struggle with the original
will.

"Pleasure"...

Is a feeling of power (presupposing the existence of pain).

The organic functions shown to be but forms of the fundamental
will, the will to power,--and buds thereof.

The will to power specialises itself as will to nutrition, to
property, to tools, to servants (obedience), and to rulers: the body
as an example.--The stronger will directs the weaker. There is no other
form of causality than that of will to will. It is not to be explained
mechanically.

Thinking, feeling, willing, in all living organisms. What is a
desire if it be not: a provocation of the feeling of power by an
obstacle (or, better still, by rhythmical obstacles and resisting
forces)--so that it surges through it? Thus in all pleasure pain is
understood.--If the pleasure is to be very great, the pains preceding
it must have been very long, and the whole bow of life must have been
strained to the utmost.

Intellectual functions. The will to shaping, forming, and making
like, etc.

Man.

With the body as clue.--Granting that the "soul" was only an
attractive and mysterious thought, from which philosophers rightly,
but reluctantly, separated themselves--that which they have since
learnt to put in its place is perhaps even more attractive and even
more mysterious. The human body, in which the whole of the most
distant and most recent past of all organic life once more becomes
living and corporal, seems to flow through, this past and right over
it like a huge and inaudible torrent; the body is a more wonderful
thought than the old "soul." In all ages the body, as our actual
property, as our most certain being, in short, as our ego, has been
more earnestly believed in than the spirit (or the "soul," or the
subject, as the school jargon now calls it). It has never occurred to
any one to regard his stomach as a strange or a divine stomach; but
that there is a tendency and a predilection in man to regard all his
thoughts as "inspired," all his values as "imparted to him by a God,"
all his instincts as dawning activities--this is proved by the evidence
of every age in man's history. Even now, especially among artists,
there may very often be noticed a sort of wonder, and a deferential
hesitation to decide, when the question occurs to them, by what means
they achieved their happiest work, and from which world the creative
thought came down to them: when they question in this way, they are
possessed by a feeling of guilelessness and childish shyness. They dare
not say: "That came from me; it was my hand which threw that die."
Conversely, even those philosophers and theologians, who in their logic
and piety found the most imperative reasons for regarding their body as
a deception (and even as a deception overcome and disposed of), could
not help recognising the foolish fact that the body still remained: and
the most unexpected proofs of this are to be found partly in Pauline
and partly in Vedantic philosophy. But what does strength of faith
ultimately mean? Nothing!--A strong faith might also be a foolish
faith!--There is food for reflection.

And supposing the faith in the body were ultimately but the result
of a conclusion; supposing it were a false conclusion, as idealists
declare it is, would it not then involve some doubt concerning the
trustworthiness of the spirit itself which thus causes us to draw wrong
conclusions?

Supposing the plurality of things, and space, and time, and motion
(and whatever the other first principles of a belief in the body may
be) were errors--what suspicions would not then be roused against the
spirit which led us to form such first principles? Let it suffice that
the belief in the body is, at any rate for the present, a much stronger
belief than the belief in the spirit, and he who would fain undermine
it assails the authority of the spirit most thoroughly in so doing!

The Body as an Empire.

The aristocracy in the body, the majority of the rulers (the fight
between the cells and the tissues).

Slavery and the division of labour: the higher type alone possible
through the subjection of the lower to a function.

Pleasure and pain, not contraries. The feeling of power.

"Nutrition" only a result of the insatiable lust of appropriation in
the Will to Power.

"Procreation": this is the decay which supervenes when the ruling cells
are too weak to organise appropriated material.

It is the moulding force which will have a continual supply of new
material (more "force"). The masterly construction of an organism out
of an egg.

"The mechanical interpretation": recognises only quantities: but the
real energy is in the quality. Mechanics can therefore only describe
processes; it cannot explain them.

"Purpose." We should start out from the "sagacity" of plants.

The concept of "meliorism": not only greater complexity, but greater
power (it need not be only greater masses).

Conclusion concerning the evolution of man: the road to perfection lies
in the bringing forth of the most powerful individuals, for whose use
the great masses would be converted into mere tools (that is to say,
into the most intelligent and flexible tools possible).

Why is all activity, even that of a sense, associated with
pleasure? Because, before the activity was possible, an obstacle or
a burden was done away with. Or, rather, because all action is a
process of overcoming, of becoming master of, and of increasing the
feeling of power? The pleasure of thought. Ultimately it is not
only the feeling of power, but also the pleasure of creating and of
contemplating the creation: for all activity enters our consciousness
in the form of "works."

Creating is an act of selecting and of finishing the thing selected.
(In every act of the will, this is the essential element.)

All phenomena which are the result of intentions may be reduced to the
intention of increasing power.

When we do anything, we are conscious of a feeling of strength;
we often have this sensation before the act--that is to say, while
imagining the thing to do (as, for instance, at the sight of an enemy,
of an obstacle, which we feel equal to): it is always an accompanying
sensation. Instinctively we think that this feeling of strength is
the cause of the action, that it is the "motive force." Our belief in
causation is the belief in force and its effect; it is a transcript
of our experience: in which we identify force and the feeling of
force.--Force, however, never moves things; the strength which is
conscious "does not set the muscles moving." "Of such a process we have
no experience, no idea." "We experience as little concerning force as
a motive power, as concerning the necessity of a movement." Force is
said to be the constraining element! "All we know is that one thing
follows another;--we know nothing of either compulsion or arbitrariness
in regard to the one following the other. Causality is first invented
by thinking compulsion into the sequence of processes. A certain
"understanding" of the thing is the result--that is to say, we humanise
the process a little, we make it more "familiar"; the familiar is the
known habitual fact of human compulsion associated with the feeling of
force.

I have the intention of extending my arm; taking it for granted that
I know as little of the physiology of the human body and of the
mechanical laws of its movements as the man in the street, what could
there be more vague, more bloodless, more uncertain than this intention
compared with what follows it? And supposing I were the astutest
of mechanics, and especially conversant with the formulae which are
applicable in this case, I should not be able to extend my arm one
whit the better. Our "knowledge" and our "action" in this case lie
coldly apart: as though in two different regions.--Again: Napoleon
carries out a plan of campaign--what does that mean? In this case,
everything concerning the consummation of the campaign is known,
because everything must be done through words of command: but even here
subordinates are taken for granted, who apply and adapt the general
plan to the particular emergency, to the degree of strength, etc.

For ages we have always ascribed the value of an action, of a
character, of an existence, to the intention, to the purpose for
which it was done, acted, or lived: this primeval idiosyncrasy of taste
ultimately takes a dangerous turn provided the lack of intention and
purpose in all phenomena comes ever more to the front in consciousness.
With it a general depreciation of all values seems to be preparing:
"All is without sense."--This melancholy phrase means: "All sense
lies in the intention, and if the intention is absolutely lacking,
then sense must be lacking too." In conformity with this valuation,
people were forced to place the value of life in a a life after death,
or in the progressive development of ideas, or of mankind, or of the
people, or of man to superman; but in this way the progressus in
infinitum of purpose had been reached: it was ultimately necessary to
find one's self a place in the process of the world (perhaps with the
disdaemonistic outlook, it was a process which led to nonentity).

In regard to this point, "purpose" needs a somewhat more severe
criticism: it ought to be recognised that an action is never
caused by a purpose; that an object and the means thereto are
interpretations, by means of which certain points in a phenomena
are selected and accentuated, at the cost of other, more numerous,
points, that every time something is done for a purpose, something
fundamentally different, and yet other things happen; that in regard
to the action done with a purpose, the case is the same as with the
so-called purposefulness of the heat which is radiated from the sun:
the greater part of the total sum is squandered; a portion of it, which
is scarcely worth reckoning, has a "purpose," has "sense"; that an
"end" with its "means" is an absurdly indefinite description, which
indeed may be able to command as a precept, as "will," but presupposes
a system of obedient and trained instruments, which, in the place of
the indefinite, puts forward a host of determined entities (i.e. we
imagine a system of clever but narrow intellects who postulate end
and means, in order to be able to grant our only known "end," the role
of the "cause of an action,"--a proceeding to which we have no right:
it is tantamount to solving a problem by placing its solution in an
inaccessible world which we cannot observe).

Finally, why could not an "end" be merely an accompanying feature
in the series of changes among the active forces which bring about
the action--a pale stenographic symbol stretched in consciousness
beforehand, and which serves as a guide to what happens, even as
a symbol of what happens, not as its cause?--But in this way we
criticise will itself: is it not an illusion to regard that which
enters consciousness as will-power, as a cause? Are not all conscious
phenomena only final phenomena--the lost links in a chain, but
apparently conditioning one another in their sequence within the plane
of consciousness? This might be an illusion.

Science does not inquire what impels us to will: on the contrary, it
denies that willing takes place at all, and supposes that something
quite different has happened--in short, that the belief in "will" and
"end" is an illusion. It does not inquire into the motives of an
action, as if these had been present in consciousness previous to the
action, but it first divides the action up into a group of phenomena,
and then seeks the previous history of this mechanical movement--but
not in the terms of feeling, perception, and thought; from this
quarter it can never accept the explanation: perception is precisely
the matter of science, which has to be explained.--The problem of
science is precisely to explain the world, without taking perceptions
as the cause: for that would mean regarding perceptions themselves
as the cause of perceptions. The task of science is by no means
accomplished.

Thus: either there is no such thing as will,--the hypothesis of
science,--or the will is free. The latter assumption represents the
prevailing feeling, of which we cannot rid ourselves, even if the
hypothesis of science were proved.

The popular belief in cause and effect is founded on the principle that
free will is the cause of every effect: thereby alone do we arrive
at the feeling of causation. And thereto belongs also the feeling that
every cause is not an effect, but always only a cause--if will is
the cause. "Our acts of will are not necessary"--this lies in the
very concept of "will." The effect necessarily comes after the
cause--that is what we feel. It is merely a hypothesis that even our
willing is compulsory in every case.

"To will" is not "to desire," to strive, to aspire to; it distinguishes
itself from that through the passion of commanding.

There is no such thing as "willing," but only the willing of
something: the aim must not be severed from the state--as the
epistemologists sever it. "Willing," as they understand it, is no more
possible than "thinking": it is a pure invention.

It is essential to willing that something should be commanded (but
that does not mean that the will is carried into effect).

The general state of tension, by virtue of which a force seeks to
discharge itself, is not "willing."

"Pain" and "pleasure" are the most absurd means of expressing
judgments, which of course does not mean that the judgments which are
enunciated in this way must necessarily be absurd. The elimination
of all substantiation and logic, a yes or no in the reduction to a
passionate desire to have or to reject, an imperative abbreviation, the
utility of which is irrefutable: that is pain and pleasure. Its origin
is in the central sphere of the intellect; its prerequisite is an
infinitely accelerated process of perceiving, ordering, co-ordinating,
calculating, concluding: pleasure and pain are always final phenomena,
they are never causes.

As to deciding what provokes pain and pleasure, that is a question
which depends upon the degree of power: the same thing, when
confronted with a small quantity of power, may seem a danger and may
suggest the need of speedy defence, and when confronted with the
consciousness of greater power, may be a voluptuous stimulus and may be
followed by a feeling of pleasure.

All feelings of pleasure and pain presuppose a measuring of collective
utility and collective harmfulness: consequently a sphere where
there is the willing of an object (of a condition) and the selection of
the means thereto. Pleasure and pain are never "original facts."

The feelings of pleasure and pain are reactions of the will
(emotions) in which the intellectual centre fixes the value of certain
supervening changes as a collective value, and also as an introduction
of contrary actions.

The belief in "emotions"--Emotions are a fabrication of the
intellect, an invention of causes which do not exist. All general
bodily sensations which we do not understand are interpreted
intellectually--that is to say, a reason is sought why we feel
thus or thus among certain people or in certain experiences. Thus
something disadvantageous dangerous, and strange is taken for granted,
as if it were the cause of our being indisposed; as a matter of fact,
it gets added to the indisposition, so as to make our condition
thinkable.--Mighty rushes of blood to the brain, accompanied by
a feeling of suffocation, are interpreted as anger: the people
and things which provoke our anger are a means of relieving our
physiological condition. Subsequently, after long habituation, certain
processes and general feelings are so regularly correlated that the
sight of certain processes provokes that condition of general feeling,
and induces vascular engorgements, the ejection of seminal fluid, etc.:
we then say that the "emotion is provoked by propinquity."

Judgments already inhere in pleasure and pain: stimuli become
differentiated, according as to whether they increase or reduce the
feeling of power.

The belief in willing. To believe that a thought may be the cause
of a mechanical movement is to believe in miracles. The consistency
of science demands that once we have made the world thinkable for
ourselves by means of pictures, we should also make the emotions, the
desires, the will, etc., thinkable--that is to say, we should deny
them and treat them as errors of the intellect.

Free will or no free will?--There is no such thing as "Will": that
is only a simplified conception on the part of the understanding, like
"matter."

All actions must first be prepared and made possible mechanically
before they can be willed. Or, in most cases the "object" of an
action enters the brain only after everything is prepared for its
accomplishment. The object is an inner "stimulus"--nothing more.

The most proximate prelude to an action relates to that action: but
further back still there lies a preparatory history which covers a
far wider field: the individual action is only a factor in a much more
extensive and subsequent fact. The shorter and the longer processes
are not reported.

The theory of chance: the soul is a selecting and self-nourishing
being, which is persistently extremely clever and creative (this
creative power is commonly overlocked! it is taken to be merely
passive).

I recognised the active and creative power within the
accidental.--Accident is in itself nothing more than the clashing of
creative impulses.

Among the enormous multiplicity of phenomena to be observed in an
organic being, that part which becomes conscious is a mere means:
and the particle of "virtue," "self abnegation," and other fanciful
inventions, are denied in a most thoroughgoing manner by the whole of
the remaining phenomena. We would do well to study our organism in all
its immorality....

The animal functions are, as a matter of fact, a million times more
important than all beautiful states of the soul and heights of
consciousness: the latter are an overflow, in so far as they are not
needed as instruments in the service of the animal functions. The whole
of conscious life: the spirit together with the soul, the heart,
goodness, and virtue; in whose service does it work? In the greatest
possible perfection of the means (for acquiring nourishment and
advancement) serving the fundamental animal functions: above all, the
ascent of the line of Life.

That which is called "flesh" and "body" is of such incalculably greater
importance, that the rest is nothing more than a small appurtenance.
To continue the chain of life so that it becomes ever more
powerful--that is the task.

But now observe how the heart, the soul, virtue, and spirit together
conspire formally to thwart this purpose: as if they were the object
of every endeavour! ... The degeneration of life is essentially
determined by the extraordinary fallibility of consciousness, which
is held at bay least of all by the instincts, and thus commits the
gravest and profoundest errors.

Now could any more insane extravagance of vanity be imagined than
to measure the value of existence according to the pleasant or
unpleasant feelings of this consciousness? It is obviously only a
means: and pleasant or unpleasant feelings are also no more than means.

According to what standard is the objective value measured? According
to the quantity of increased and more organised power alone.

The value of all valuing.--My desire would be to see the agent once
more identified with the action, after action has been deprived of all
meaning by having been separated in thought from the agent; I should
like to see the notion of doing something, the idea of a "purpose,"
of an "intention," of an object, reintroduced into the action, after
action has been made insignificant by having been artificially
separated from these things.

All "objects," "purposes," "meanings," are only manners of expression
and metamorphoses of the one will inherent in all phenomena; of the
will to power. To have an object, a purpose, or an intention, in
fact to will generally, is equivalent to the desire for greater
strength, for fuller growth, and for the means thereto in addition.

The most general and fundamental instinct in all action and willing
is precisely on that account the one which is least known and is most
concealed; for in practice we always follow its bidding, for the simple
reason that we are in ourselves its bidding....

All valuations are only the results of, and the narrow points of view
in servings this one will: valuing in itself is nothing save this,
--will to power.

To criticise existence from the standpoint of any one of these
values is utter nonsense and error. Even supposing that a process of
annihilation follows from such a value, even so this process is in the
service of this will.

The valuation of existence itself! But existence is this valuing
itself!--and even when we say "no," we still do what we are.

We ought now to perceive the absurdity of this pretence at judging
existence; and we ought to try and discover what actually takes place
there. It is symptomatic.

Concerning the Origin of our Valuations.

We are able to analyse our body, and by doing so we get the same
idea of it as of the stellar system, and the differences between
organic and inorganic lapses. Formerly the movements of the stars were
explained as the effects of beings consciously pursuing a purpose:
this is no longer required, and even in regard to the movements of
the body and its changes, the belief has long since been abandoned
that they can be explained by an appeal to a consciousness which has
a determined purpose. By far the greater number of movements have
nothing to do with consciousness at all: neither have they anything
to do with sensation. Sensations and thoughts are extremely rare
and insignificant things compared with the innumerable phenomena
occurring every second.

On the other hand, we believe that a certain conformity of means
to ends rules over the very smallest phenomenon, which it is quite
beyond our deepest science to understand; a sort of cautiousness,
selectiveness, co-ordination, and repairing process, etc. In short, we
are in the presence of an activity to which it would be necessary
to ascribe an incalculably higher and more extensive intellect than
the one we are acquainted with. We learn to think less of all that
is conscious: we unlearn the habit of making ourselves responsible for
ourselves, because, as conscious beings fixing purposes, we are but the
smallest part of ourselves.

Of the numerous influences taking effect every second, for instance,
air, electricity, we feel scarcely anything at all. There might be a
number of forces, which, though they never make themselves felt by
us, yet influence us continually. Pleasure and pain are very rare and
scanty phenomena, compared with the countless stimuli with which a cell
or an organ operates upon another cell or organ.

It is the phase of the modesty of consciousness. Finally, we can
grasp the conscious ego itself, merely as an instrument in the
service of that higher and more extensive intellect: and then we may
ask whether all conscious willing, all conscious purposes, all
valuations, are not perhaps only means by virtue of which something
essentially different is attained, from that which consciousness
supposes. We mean: it is a question of our pleasure and pain but
pleasure and pain might be the means whereby we had something to do
which lies outside our consciousness.

This is to show how very superficial all conscious phenomena
really are; how an action and the image of it differ; how little
we know about what precedes an action; how fantastic our feelings,
"freewill," and "cause and effect" are; how thoughts and images, just
like words, are only signs of thoughts; the impossibility of finding
the grounds of any action; the superficiality of all praise and blame;
how essentially our conscious life is composed of fancies and
illusion; how all our words merely stand for fancies (our emotions
too), and how the union of mankind depends upon the transmission
and continuation of these fancies: whereas, at bottom, the real union
of mankind by means of procreation pursues its unknown way. Does this
belief in the common fancies of men really alter mankind? Or is the
whole body of ideas and valuations only an expression in itself of
unknown changes? Are there really such things as will, purposes,
thoughts, values? Is the whole of conscious life perhaps no more than
mirage? Even when values seem to determine the actions of a man,
they are, as a matter of fact, doing something quite different! In
short, granting that a certain conformity of means to end might be
demonstrated in the action of nature, without the assumption of a
ruling ego: could not our notion of purposes, and our will, etc., be
only a symbolic language standing for something quite different--that
is to say, something not-willing and unconscious? only the thinnest
semblance of that natural conformity of means to end in the organic
world, but not in any way different therefrom?

Briefly, perhaps the whole of mental development is a matter of the
body: it is the consciously recorded history of the fact that a
higher body is forming. The organic ascends to higher regions.
Our longing to know Nature is a means by virtue of which the body
would reach perfection. Or, better still, hundreds of thousands of
experiments are made to alter the nourishment and the mode of living
of the body: the body's consciousness and valuations, its kinds of
pleasure and pain, are signs of these changes and experiments. In the
end, it is not a question concerning man; for he must be surpassed.

To what Extent are all Interpretations of the World Symptoms of a
Ruling Instinct.

The artistic contemplation of the world: to sit before the world
and to survey it. But here the analysis of aesthetical contemplation,
its reduction to cruelty, its feeling of security, its judicial and
detached attitude, etc., are lacking. The artist himself must be taken,
together with his psychology (the criticism of the instinct of play, as
a discharge of energy, the love of change, the love of bringing one's
soul in touch with strange things, the absolute egoism of the artist,
etc.). What instincts does he sublimate?

The scientific contemplation of the world: a criticism of the
psychological longing for science, the desire to make everything
comprehensible; the desire to make everything practical, useful,
capable of being exploited--to what extent this is anti-aesthetic.
Only that value counts, which may be reckoned in figures. How it
happens that a mediocre type of man preponderates under the influence
of science. It would be terrible if even history were to be taken
possession of in this way--the realm of the superior, of the judicial.
What instincts are here sublimated!

The religious contemplation of the world: a criticism of the religious
man. It is not necessary to take the moral man as the type, but the man
who has extreme feelings of exaltation and of deep depression, and who
interprets the former with thankfulness or suspicion without, however,
seeking their origin in himself (nor the latter either). The man who
essentially feels anything but free, who sublimates his conditions and
states of submission.

The moral contemplation of the world. The feelings peculiar to
certain social ranks are projected into the universe: stability,
law, the making of things orderly, and the making of things alike,
are sought in the highest spheres, because they are valued most
highly,--above everything or behind everything.

What is common to all: the ruling instincts wish to be regarded as
the highest values in general, even as the creative and ruling
powers. It is understood that these instincts either oppose or
overcome each other (join up synthetically, or alternate in power).
Their profound antagonism is, however, so great, that in those cases in
which they all insist upon being gratified, a man of very thorough
mediocrity is the outcome.

It is a question whether the origin of our apparent "knowledge" is not
also a mere offshoot of our older valuations, which are so completely
assimilated that they belong to the very basis of our nature. In this
way only the more recent needs engage in battle with results of the
oldest needs.

The world is seen, felt, and interpreted thus and thus, in order
that organic life may be preserved with this particular manner of
interpretation. Man is not only an individual, but the continuation
of collective organic life in one definite line. The fact that man
survives, proves that a certain species of interpretations (even though
it still be added to) has also survived; that, as a system, this method
of interpreting has not changed. "Adaptation."

Our "dissatisfaction," our "ideal," etc., may possibly be the result
of this incorporated piece of interpretation, of our particular point
of view: the organic world may ultimately perish owing to it just as
the division of labour in organisms may be the means of bringing about
the ruin of the whole, if one part happen to wither or weaken. The
destruction of organic life, and even of the highest form thereof,
must follow the same principles as the destruction of the individual.

Judged from the standpoint of the theory of descent, individuation
shows the continuous breaking up of one into two, and the equally
continuous annihilation of individuals for the sake of a few
individuals, which evolution bears onwards; the greater mass always
perishes ("the body").

The fundamental phenomena: innumerable individuals are sacrificed for
the sake of a few, in order to make the few possible.--One must not
allow one's self to be deceived; the case is the same with peoples
and races: they produce the "body" for the generation of isolated and
valuable individuals, who continue the great process.

I am opposed to the theory that the individual studies the interests of
the species, or of posterity, at the cost of his own advantage: all
this is only apparent.

The excessive importance which he attaches to the sexual instinct
is not the result of the latter's importance to the species, for
procreation is the actual performance of the individual, it is his
greatest interest, and therefore it is his highest expression of
power (not judged from the standpoint of consciousness, but from the
very centre of the individual).

The fundamental errors of the biologists who have lived hitherto: it
is not a matter of the species, but of rearing stronger individuals
(the many are only a means).

Life is not the continuous adjustment of internal relations to
external relations, but will to power, which, proceeding from inside,
subjugates and incorporates an ever-increasing quantity of "external"
phenomena.

These biologists continue the moral valuations ("the absolutely
higher worth of Altruism," the antagonism towards the lust of dominion,
towards war, towards all that which is not useful, and towards all
order of rank and of class).

In natural science, the moral depreciation of the ego still goes hand
in hand with the overestimation of the species. But the species is
quite as illusory as the ego: a false distinction has been made. The
ego is a hundred times more than a mere unit in a chain of creatures;
it is the chain itself, in every possible respect, and the species
is merely an abstraction suggested by the multiplicity and partial
similarity of these chains. That the individual is sacrificed to the
species, as people often say he is, is not a fact at all: it is rather
only an example of false interpretation.

The formula of the "progress"-superstition according to a famous
physiologist of the cerebral regions:--

"L'animal ne fait jamais de progres comme espece. L'homme seul fait de
progres comme espece."

No.

Anti-Darwin.--The domestication of man: what definite value can
it have, or has domestication in itself a definite value?--There are
reasons for denying the latter proposition.

Darwin's school of thought certainly goes to great pains to convince
us of the reverse: it would fain prove that the influence of
domestication may be profound and fundamental. For the time being, we
stand firmly as we did before; up to the present no results save very
superficial modification or degeneration have been shown to follow upon
domestication. And everything that escapes from the hand and discipline
of man, returns almost immediately to its original natural condition.
The type remains constant, man cannot "denaturer la nature."

Biologists reckon upon the struggle for existence, the death of the
weaker creature and the survival of the most robust, most gifted
combatant; on that account they imagine a continuous increase in the
perfection of all creatures. We, on the contrary, have convinced
ourselves of the fact, that in the struggle for existence, accident
serves the cause of the weak quite as much as that of the strong;
that craftiness often supplements strength with advantage; that the
prolificness of a species is related in a remarkable manner to that
species chances of destruction....

Natural Selection is also credited with the power of slowly
effecting unlimited metamorphoses: it is believed that every advantage
is transmitted by heredity, and strengthened in the course of
generations (when heredity is known to be so capricious that ...);
the happy adaptations of certain creatures to very special conditions
of life, are regarded as the result of surrounding influences.
Nowhere, however, are examples of unconscious selection to be found
(absolutely nowhere). The most different individuals associate one with
the other; the extremes become lost in the mass. Each vies with the
other to maintain his kind; those creatures whose appearance shields
them from certain dangers, do not alter this appearance when they are
in an environment quite devoid of danger.... If they live in places
where their coats or their hides do not conceal them, they do not adapt
themselves to their surroundings in any way.

The selection of the most beautiful has been so exaggerated, that
it greatly exceeds the instincts for beauty in our own race! As a
matter of fact, the most beautiful creature often couples with the
most debased, and the largest with the smallest. We almost always see
males and females taking advantage of their first chance meeting, and
manifesting no taste or selectiveness at all.--Modification through
climate and nourishment--but as a matter of fact unimportant.

There are no intermediate forms.--

The growing evolution of creatures is assumed. All grounds for this
assumption are entirely lacking. Every type has its limitations:
beyond these evolution cannot carry it.

My general point of view. First proposition: Man as a species is
not progressing. Higher specimens are indeed attained; but they do
not survive. The general level of the species is not raised.

Second proposition: Man as a species does not represent any sort of
progress compared with any other animal. The whole of the animal and
plant world does not develop from the lower to the higher.... but all
simultaneously, haphazardly, confusedly, and at variance. The richest
and most complex forms--and the term "higher type" means no more than
this--perish more easily: only the lowest succeed in maintaining their
apparent imperishableness. The former are seldom attained, and maintain
their superior position with difficulty, the latter are compensated
by great fruitfulness.--In the human race, also, the superior
specimens, the happy cases of evolution, are the first to perish amid
the fluctuations of chances for and against them. They are exposed to
every form of decadence: they are extreme, and, on that account alone,
already decadents.... The short duration of beauty, of genius, of the
Caesar, is sui generis: such things are not hereditary. The type is
inherited, there is nothing extreme or particularly "happy" about a
type----It is not a case of a particular fate, or of the "evil will" of
Nature, but merely of the concept "superior type": the higher type is
an example of an incomparably greater degree of complexity a greater
sum of co-ordinated elements: but on this account disintegration
becomes a thousand times more threatening. "Genius" is the sublimest
machine in existence--hence it is the most fragile.

Third propositio:: The domestication (culture) of man does not
sink very deep. When it does sink far below the skin it immediately
becomes degeneration (type: the Christian). The wild man (or, in moral
terminology, the evil man) is a reversion to Nature--and, in a
certain sense, he represents a recovery, a cure from the effects of
"culture." ...

Anti-Darwin.--What surprises me most on making a general survey of
the great destinies of man, is that I invariably see the reverse of
what to-day Darwin and his school sees or will persist in seeing:
selection in favour of the stronger, the better-constituted, and the
progress of the species. Precisely the reverse of this stares one in
the face: the suppression of the lucky cases, the uselessness of the
more highly constituted types, the inevitable mastery of the mediocre,
and even of those who are below mediocrity. Unless we are shown some
reason why man is an exception among living creatures, I incline to the
belief that Darwin's school is everywhere at fault. That will to power,
in which I perceive the ultimate reason and character of all change,
explains why it is that selection is never in favour of the exceptions
and of the lucky cases: the strongest and happiest natures are weak
when they are confronted with a majority ruled by organised gregarious
instincts and the fear which possesses the weak. My general view of
the world of values shows that in the highest values which now sway the
destiny of man, the happy cases among men, the select specimens do not
prevail: but rather the decadent specimens,--perhaps there is nothing
more interesting in the world than this unpleasant spectacle....

Strange as it may seem, the strong always have to be upheld against the
weak; and the well-constituted against the ill-constituted, the healthy
against the sick and physiologically botched. If we drew our morals
from reality, they would read thus: the mediocre are more valuable than
the exceptional creatures, and the decadent than the mediocre; the
will to nonentity prevails over the will to life--and the general aim
now is, in Christian, Buddhistic, Schopenhauerian phraseology: "It is
better not to be than to be."

I protest against this formulating of reality into a moral: and I
loathe Christianity with a deadly loathing, because it created sublime
words and attitudes in order to deck a revolting truth with all the
tawdriness of justice, virtue, and godliness....

I see all philosophers and the whole of science on their knees before a
reality which is the reverse of "the struggle for life," as Darwin and
his school understood it--that is to say, wherever I look, I see those
prevailing and surviving, who throw doubt and suspicion upon life and
the value of life.--The error of the Darwinian school became a problem
to me: how can one be so blind as to make this mistake?

That species show an ascending tendency, is the most nonsensical
assertion that has ever been made: until now they have only manifested
a dead level. There is nothing whatever to prove that the higher
organisms have developed from the lower. I see that the lower, owing to
their numerical strength, their craft, and ruse, now preponderate,--and
I fail to see an instance in which an accidental change produces
an advantage, at least not for a very long period: for it would be
necessary to find some reason why an accidental change should become so
very strong.

I do indeed find the "cruelty of Nature" which is so often referred
to; but in a different place: Nature is cruel, but against her lucky
and well-constituted children; she protects and shelters and loves the
lowly.

In short, the increase of a species' power, as the result of the
preponderance of its particularly well-constituted and strong
specimens, is perhaps less of a certainty than that it is the result of
the preponderance of its mediocre and lower specimens ... in the case
of the latter, we find great fruitfulness and permanence: in the case
of the former, the besetting dangers are greater, waste is more rapid,
and decimation is more speedy.

Man as he has appeared up to the present is the embryo of the man
of the future; all the formative powers which are to produce the
latter, already lie in the former: and owing to the fact that they are
enormous, the more promising for the future the modern individual
happens to be, the more suffering falls to his lot. This is the
profoundest concept of suffering. The formative powers clash.--The
isolation of the individual need not deceive one--as a matter of fact,
some uninterrupted current does actually flow through all individuals,
and does thus unite them. The fact that they feel themselves isolated,
is the most powerful spur in the process of setting themselves the
loftiest of aims: their search for happiness is the means which keeps
together and moderates the formative powers, and keeps them from being
mutually destructive.

Excessive intellectual strength sets itself new goals; it is not in
the least satisfied by the command and the leadership of the inferior
world, or by the preservation of the organism, of the "individual."

We are more than the individual: we are the whole chain itself, with
the tasks of all the possible futures of that chain in us.

Theory of the Will to Power and of Valuations.

The unitary view of psychology.--We are accustomed to regard the
development of a vast number of forms as compatible with one single
origin.

My theory would be: that the will to power is the primitive motive
force out of which all other motives have been derived;

That it is exceedingly illuminating to substitute power for
individual "happiness" (after which every living organism is said to
strive): "It strives after power, after more power";--happiness is
only a symptom of the feeling of power attained, a consciousness of
difference (it does not strive after happiness: but happiness steps
in when the object is attained, after which the organism has striven:
happiness is an accompanying, not an actuating factor);

That all motive force is the will to power; that there is no other
force, either physical, dynamic, or psychic.

In our science, where the concept cause and effect is reduced to a
relationship of complete equilibrium, and in which it seems desirable
for the same quantum of force to be found on either side, all idea
of a motive power is absent: we only apprehend results, and we call
these equal from the point of view of their content of force....

It is a matter of mere experience that change never ceases: at bottom
we have not the smallest grounds for assuming that any one particular
change must follow upon any other. On the contrary, any state which
has been attained would seem almost forced to maintain itself intact
if it had not within itself a capacity for not desiring to maintain
itself.... Spinoza's proposition concerning "self-preservation" ought
as a matter of fact to put a stop to change. But the proposition is
false; the contrary is true. In all living organisms it can be clearly
shown that they do everything not to remain as they are, but to become
greater....

"Will to power" and causality.--From a psychological point of view
the idea of "cause" is our feeling of power in the act which is called
willing--our concept effect is the superstition that this feeling of
power is itself the force which moves things....

A state which accompanies an event and is already an effect of
that event is deemed "sufficient cause" of the latter; the tense
relationship of our feeling of power (pleasure as the feeling of power)
and of an obstacle being overcome--are these things illusions?

If we translate the notion "cause" back into the only sphere which is
known to us, and out of which we have taken it, we cannot imagine any
change in which the will to power is not inherent. We do not know how
to account for any change which is not a trespassing of one power on
another.

Mechanics only show us the results, and then only in images (movement
is a figure of speech); gravitation itself has no mechanical cause,
because it is itself the first cause of mechanical results.

The will to accumulate force is confined to the phenomenon of life,
to nourishment, to procreation, to inheritance, to society, states,
customs, authority. Should we not be allowed to assume that this will
is the motive power also of chemistry?--and of the cosmic order?

Not only conservation of energy, but the minimum amount of waste; so
that the only reality is this: the will of every centre of power to
become stronger--not self-preservation, but the desire to appropriate,
to become master, to become more, to become stronger.

Is the fact that science is possible a proof of the principle of
causation--"From like causes, like effects"--"A permanent law of
things"--"Invariable order"? Because something is calculable, is it
therefore on that account necessary?

If something happens thus, and thus only, it is not the manifestation
of a "principle," of a "law," of "order." What happens is that certain
quanta of power begin to operate, and their essence is to exercise
their power over all other quanta of power. Can we assume the existence
of a striving after power without a feeling of pleasure and pain,
i.e. without the sensation of an increase or a decrease of power?
Is mechanism only a language of signs for the concealed fact of a
world of fighting and conquering quanta of will-power? All mechanical
first-principles, matter, atoms, weight, pressure, and repulsion, are
not facts in themselves, but interpretations arrived at with the help
of psychical fictions.

Life, which is our best known form of being, is altogether "will to
the accumulation of strength"--all the processes of life hinge on
this: everything aims, not at preservation, but at accretion and
accumulation. Life as an individual case (a hypothesis which may be
applied to existence in general) strives after the maximum feeling
of power; life is essentially a striving after more power; striving
itself is only a straining after more power; the most fundamental
and innermost thing of all is this will. (Mechanism is merely the
semeiotics of the results.)

The thing which is the cause of the existence of development cannot
in the course of investigation be found above development; it should
neither be regarded as "evolving" nor as evolved ... the "will to
power" cannot have been evolved.

What is the relation of the whole of the organic process towards the
rest of nature?--Here the fundamental will reveals itself.

Is the "will to power" a kind of will, or is it identical with the
concept will? Is it equivalent to desiring or commanding; is it the
will which Schopenhauer says is the essence of things?

My proposition is that the will of psychologists hitherto has been an
unjustifiable generalisation, and that there is no such thing as this
sort of will, that instead of the development of one will into several
forms being taken as a fact, the character of will has been cancelled
owing to the fact that its content, its "whither," was subtracted from
it: in Schopenhauer this is so in the highest degree; what he calls
"will" is merely an empty word. There is even less plausibility in
the will to live: for life is simply one of the manifestations of the
will to power; it is quite arbitrary and ridiculous to suggest that
everything is striving to enter into this particular form of the will
to power.

If the innermost essence of existence is the will to power; if
happiness is every increase of power, and unhappiness the feeling of
not being able to resist, of not being able to become master: may
we not then postulate happiness and pain as cardinal facts? Is will
possible without these two oscillations of yea and nay? But who feels
happiness? ... Who will have power? ... Nonsensical question! If the
essence of all things is itself will to power, and consequently the
ability to feel pleasure and pain! Albeit: contrasts and obstacles are
necessary, therefore also, relatively, units which trespass on one
another.

According to the obstacles which a force seeks with a view of
overcoming them, the measure of the failure and the fatality thus
provoked must increase, and in so far as every force can only manifest
itself against some thing that opposes it, an element of unhappiness is
necessarily inherent in every action. But this pain acts as a greater
incitement to life, and increases the will to power.

If pleasure and pain are related to the feeling of power, life would
have to represent such an increase in power that the difference, the
"plus," would have to enter consciousness. A dead level of power,
if maintained, would have to measure its happiness in relation
to depreciations of that level, i.e. in relation to states of
unhappiness and not of happiness.... The will to an increase lies
in the essence of happiness: that power is enhanced, and that this
difference becomes conscious.

In a state of decadence after a certain time the opposite difference
becomes conscious, that is decrease: the memory of former strong
moments depresses the present feelings of happiness in this state
comparison reduces happiness.

It is not the satisfaction of the will which is the cause of happiness
(to this superficial theory I am more particularly opposed--this absurd
psychological forgery in regard to the most simple things), but it is
that the will is always striving to overcome that which stands in its
way. The feeling of happiness lies precisely in the discontentedness of
the will, in the fact that without opponents and obstacles it is never
satisfied. "The happy man": a gregarious ideal.

The normal discontent of our instincts--for instance, of the instinct
of hunger, of sex, of movement--contains nothing which is in itself
depressing; it rather provokes the feeling of life, and, whatever the
pessimists may say to us, like all the rhythms of small and irritating
stimuli, it strengthens. Instead of this discontent making us sick of
life, it is rather the great stimulus to life.

(Pleasure might even perhaps be characterised as the rhythm of small
and painful stimuli.)

Kant says: "These lines of Count Verri's (Sull' indole del piacere
e del dolore; 1781) I confirm with absolute certainty: 'Il solo
principio motore dell' uomo e il dolore. Il dolore precede ogni
piacere. Il piacere non e un essere positivo.'"[5]

[Footnote 5: On the Nature of Pleasure and Pain. "The only motive
force of man is pain. Pain precedes every pleasure. Pleasure is not a
positive thing."--Tr.]

Pain is something different from pleasure--I mean it is not the
latter's opposite.

If the essence of pleasure has been aptly characterised as the feeling
of increased power (that is to say, as a feeling of difference which
presupposes comparison), that does not define the nature of pain.
The false contrasts which the people, and consequently the language,
believes in, are always dangerous fetters which impede the march of
truth. There are even cases where a kind of pleasure is conditioned
by a certain rhythmic sequence of small, painful stimuli: in this way
a very rapid growth of the feeling of power and of the feeling of
pleasure is attained. This is the case, for instance, in tickling,
also in the sexual tickling which accompanies the coitus: here we see
pain acting as the ingredient of happiness. It seems to be a small
hindrance which is overcome, followed immediately by another small
hindrance which once again is overcome--this play of resistance and
resistance overcome is the greatest excitant of that complete feeling
of overflowing and surplus power which constitutes the essence of
happiness.

The converse, which would be an increase in the feeling of pain through
small intercalated pleasurable stimuli, does not exist: pleasure and
pain are not opposites.

Pain is undoubtedly an intellectual process in which a judgment is
inherent--the judgment harmful, in which long experience is epitomised.
There is no such thing as pain in itself. It is not the wound that
hurts, it is the experience of the harmful results a wound may have for
the whole organism, which here speaks in this deeply moving way, and is
called pain. (In the case of deleterious influences which were unknown
to ancient man, as, for instance, those residing in the new combination
of poisonous chemicals, the hint from pain is lacking, and we are lost.)

That which is quite peculiar in pain is the prolonged disturbance,
the quivering subsequent to a terrible shock in the ganglia of the
nervous system. As a matter of fact, nobody suffers from the cause of
pain (from any sort of injury, for instance), but from the protracted
disturbance of his equilibrium which follows upon the shock. Pain is a
disease of the cerebral centres--pleasure is no disease at all.

The fact that pain may be the cause of reflex actions has appearances
and even philosophical prejudice in its favour. But in very sudden
accidents, if we observe closely, we find that the reflex action occurs
appreciably earlier than the feeling of pain. I should be in a bad way
when I stumbled if I had to wait until the fact had struck the bell
of my consciousness, and until a hint of what I had to do had been
telegraphed back to me. On the contrary, what I notice as clearly as
possible is, that first, in order to avoid a fall, reflex action on the
part of my foot takes place, and then, after a certain measurable space
of time, there follows quite suddenly a kind of painful wave in my
forehead. Nobody, then, reacts to pain. Pain is subsequently projected
into the wounded quarter--but the essence of this local pain is
nevertheless not the expression of a kind of local wound, it is merely
a local sign, the strength and nature of which is in keeping with the
severity of the wound, and of which the nerve centres have taken note.
The fact that as the result of this shock the muscular power of the
organism is materially reduced, does not prove in any way that the
essence of pain is to be sought in the lowering of the feeling of power.

Once more let me repeat: nobody reacts to pain: pain is no "cause" of
action. Pain itself is a reaction; the reflex movement is another and
earlier process--both originate at different points....

The message of pain: in itself pain does not announce that which has
been momentarily damaged, but the significance of this damage for the
individual as a whole.

Are we to suppose that there are any pains which "the species" feel,
and which the individual does not?

"The sum of unhappiness outweighs the sum of happiness: consequently
it were better that the world did not exist"--"The world is something
which from a rational standpoint it were better did not exist, because
it occasions more pain than pleasure to the feeling subject"--this
futile gossip now calls itself pessimism!

Pleasure and pain are accompanying factors, not causes; they are
second-rate valuations derived from a dominating value,--they are one
with the feeling "useful," "harmful," and therefore they are absolutely
fugitive and relative. For in regard to all utility and harmfulness
there are a hundred different ways of asking "what for?"

I despise this pessimism of sensitiveness: it is in itself a sign of
profoundly impoverished life.

Man does not seek happiness and does not avoid unhappiness. Everybody
knows the famous prejudices I here contradict. Pleasure and pain are
mere results, mere accompanying phenomena--that which every man, which
every tiny particle of a living organism will have, is an increase of
power. In striving after this, pleasure and pain are encountered; it is
owing to that will that the organism seeks opposition and requires that
which stands in its way.... Pain as the hindrance of its will to power
is therefore a normal feature, a natural ingredient of every organic
phenomenon; man does not avoid it, on the contrary, he is constantly
in need of it: every triumph, every feeling of pleasure, every event
presupposes an obstacle overcome.

Let us take the simplest case, that of primitive nourishment; the
protoplasm extends its pseudopodia in order to seek for that which
resists it,--it does not do so out of hunger, but owing to its will to
power. Then it makes the attempt to overcome, to appropriate, and to
incorporate that with which it comes into contact--what people call
"nourishment" is merely a derivative, a utilitarian application, of the
primordial will to become stronger.

Pain is so far from acting as a diminution of our feeling of power,
that it actually forms in the majority of cases a spur to this
feeling,--the obstacle is the stimulus of the will to power.

Pain has been confounded with one of its subdivisions, which is
exhaustion: the latter does indeed represent a profound reduction and
lowering of the will to power, a material loss of strength--that is
to say, there is (a) pain as the stimulus to an increase or power,
and (b) pain following upon an expenditure of power; in the first
case it is a spur, in the second it is the outcome of excessive
spurring.... The inability to resist is proper to the latter form of
pain: the provocation of that which resists is proper to the former....
The only happiness which is to be felt in the state of exhaustion is
that of going to sleep; in the other case, happiness means triumph....
The great confusion of psychologists consisted in the fact that they
did not keep these two kinds of happiness--that of falling asleep,
and that of triumph--sufficiently apart. Exhausted people will have
repose, slackened limbs, peace and quiet--and these things constitute
the bliss of Nihilistic religions and philosophies, the wealthy in
vital strength, the active, want triumph, defeated opponents, and the
extension of their feeling of power over ever wider regions. Every
healthy function of the organism has this need,--and the whole organism
constitutes an intricate complexity of systems struggling for the
increase of the feeling of power....

How is it that the fundamental article of faith in all psychologies is
a piece of most outrageous contortion and fabrication? "Man strives
after happiness," for instance--how much of this is true? In order to
understand what life is, and what kind of striving and tenseness life
contains, the formula should hold good not only of trees and plants,
but of animals also. "What does the plant strive after?"--But here we
have already invented a false entity which does not exist,--concealing
and denying the fact of an infinitely variegated growth, with
individual and semi-individual starting-points, if we give it the
clumsy title "plant" as if it were a unit. It is very obvious that
the ultimate and smallest "individuals" cannot be understood in the
sense of metaphysical individuals or atoms; their sphere of power is
continually shifting its ground: but with all these changes, can it be
said that any of them strives after happiness?--All this expanding,
this incorporation and growth, is a search for resistance; movement
is essentially related to states of pain: the driving power here must
represent some other desire if it leads to such continual willing and
seeking of pain.--To what end do the trees of a virgin forest contend
with each other? "For happiness"?--For power! ...

Man is now master of the forces of nature, and master too of his own
wild and unbridled feelings (the passions have followed suit, and have
learned to become useful)--in comparison with primeval man, the man of
to-day represents an enormous quantum of power, but not an increase
in happiness! How can one maintain, then, that he has striven after
happiness?..

But while I say this I see above me, and below the stars, the
glittering rat's-tail of errors which hitherto has represented the
greatest inspiration of man: "All happiness is the result of virtue all
virtue is the result of free will"!

Let us transvalue the values: all capacity is the outcome of a
happy organisation, all freedom is the outcome of capacity (freedom
understood here as facility in self-direction. Every artist will
understand me).

"The value of life."--Every life stands by itself; all existence must
be justified, and not only life,--the justifying principle must be one
through which life itself speaks.

Life is only a means to something: it is the expression of the forms of
growth in power.

The "conscious world" cannot be a starting-point for valuing: an
"objective" valuation is necessary.

In comparison with the enormous and complicated antagonistic processes
which the collective life of every organism represents, its conscious
world of feelings, intentions, and valuations, is only a small slice.
We have absolutely no right to postulate this particle of consciousness
as the object, the wherefore, of the collective phenomena of life:
the attainment of consciousness is obviously only an additional means
to the unfolding of life and to the extension of its power. That
is why it is a piece of childish simplicity to set up happiness,
or intellectuality, or morality, or any other individual sphere of
consciousness, as the highest value: and maybe to justify "the world"
with it.

This is my fundamental objection to all philosophical and moral
cosmologies and theologies, to all wherefores and highest values that
have appeared in philosophies and philosophic religions hitherto. A
kind of means is misunderstood as the object itself: conversely life
and its growth of power were debased to a means.

If we wished to postulate an adequate object of life it would not
necessarily be related in any way with the category of conscious life;
it would require rather to explain conscious life as a mere means to
itself....

The "denial of life" regarded as the object of life, the object of
evolution! Existence--a piece of tremendous stupidity! Any such mad
interpretation is only the outcome of life's being measured by the
factors of consciousness (pleasure and pain, good and evil). Here
the means are made to stand against the end--the "unholy," absurd,
and, above all, disagreeable means: how can the end be any use when
it requires such means? But where the fault lies is here--instead of
looking for the end which would explain the necessity of such means,
we posited an end from the start which actually excludes such means,
i.e. we made a desideratum in regard to certain means (especially
pleasurable, rational, and virtuous) into a rule, and then only did we
decide what end would be desirable....

Where the fundamental fault lies is in the fact that, instead of
regarding consciousness as an instrument and an isolated phenomenon
of life in general, we made it a standard, the highest value in life:
it is the faulty standpoint of a parte ad totum,--and that is why
all philosophers are instinctively seeking at the present day for a
collective consciousness, a thing that lives and wills consciously with
all that happens, a "Spirit," a "God." But they must be told that it is
precisely thus that life is converted into a monster; that a "God" and
a general sensorium would necessarily be something on whose account the
whole of existence would have to be condemned.... Our greatest relief
came when we eliminated the general consciousness which postulates ends
and means--in this way we ceased from being necessarily pessimists....
Our greatest indictment of life was the existence of God.

Concerning the value of "Becoming."--If the movement of the world
really tended to reach a final state, that state would already have
been reached. The only fundamental fact, however, is that it does
not tend to reach a final state: and every philosophy and scientific
hypothesis (e.g. materialism) according to which such a final state
is necessary, is refuted by this fundamental fact.

I should like to have a concept of the world which does justice to this
fact. Becoming ought to be explained without having recourse to such
final designs. Booming must appear justified at every instant (or it
must defy all valuation: which has unity as its end); the present must
not under any circumstances be justified by a future, nor must the
past be justified for the sake of the present. "Necessity" must not
be interpreted in the form of a prevailing and ruling collective force
or as a prime motor; and still less as the necessary cause of some
valuable result. But to this end it is necessary to deny a collective
consciousness for Becoming,--a "God," in order that life may not be
veiled under the shadow of a being who feels and knows as we do and
yet wills nothing: "God" is useless if he wants nothing; and if he
do want something, this presupposes a general sum of suffering and
irrationality which lowers the general value of Becoming. Fortunately
any such general power is lacking (a suffering God overlooking
everything, a general sensorium and ubiquitous Spirit, would be the
greatest indictment of existence).

Strictly speaking nothing of the nature of Being must be allowed to
remain,--because in that case Becoming loses its value and gets to be
sheer and superfluous nonsense.

The next question, then, is: how did the illusion Being originate (why
was it obliged to originate);

Likewise: how was it that all valuations based upon the hypothesis that
there was such a thing as Being came to be depreciated.

But in this way we have recognised that this hypothesis concerning
Being is the source of all the calumny that has been directed against
the world (the "Better world," the "True world" the "World Beyond," the
"Thing-in-itself").

Becoming has no final state, it does not tend towards stability.

Becoming is not a state of appearance, the world of Being is
probably only appearance.

Becoming is of precisely the same value at every instant; the sum
of its value always remains equal: expressed otherwise, it has no
value; for that according to which it might be measured, and in regard
to which the word value might have some sense, is entirely lacking.
The collective value of the world defies valuation; for this reason
philosophical pessimism belongs to the order of farces.

We should not make our little desiderata the judges of existence!
Neither should we make culminating evolutionary forms (e.g. mind) the
"absolute" which stands behind evolution!

Our knowledge has become scientific to the extent in which it has
been able to make use of number and measure. It might be worth while
to try and see whether a scientific order of values might not be
constructed according to a scale of numbers and measures representing
energy.... All other values are matters of prejudice, simplicity, and
misunderstanding. They may all be reduced to that scale of numbers and
measures representing energy. The ascent in this scale would represent
an increase of value, the descent a diminution.

But here appearance and prejudice are against one (moral values are
only apparent values compared with those which are physiological).

Why the standpoint of "value" lapses:--

Because in the "whole process of the universe" the work of mankind
does not come under consideration; because a general process (viewed
in the light of a system) does not exist.

Because there is no such thing as a whole; because no depreciation of
human existence or human aims can be made in regard to something that
does not exist.

Because "necessity," "causality," "design," are merely useful
"semblances."

Because the aim is not "the increase of the sphere of consciousness,"
but the increase of power; in which increase the utility of
consciousness is also contained; and the same holds good of pleasure
and pain.

Because a mere means must not be elevated to the highest criterion
of value (such as states of consciousness like pleasure and pain, if
consciousness is in itself only a means).

Because the world is not an organism at all, but a thing of chaos;
because the development of "intellectuality" is only a means tending
relatively to extend the duration of an organisation.

Because all "desirability" has no sense in regard to the general
character of existence.

"God" is the culminating moment: life is an eternal process of deifying
and undeifying. But withal there is no zenith of values, but only a
zenith of power.

Absolute exclusion of mechanical and materialistic interpretations.
they are both only expressions of inferior states, of emotions deprived
of all spirit (of the "will to power").

The retrograde movement front the zenith of development (the
intellectualisation of power on some slave-infected soil) may be shown
to be the result of the highest degree of energy turning against
itself, once it no longer has anything to organise, and utilising its
power in order to disorganise.

The ever-increasing suppression of societies, and the latter's
subjection by a smaller number of stronger individuals.

The ever-increasing suppression of the privileged and the strong,
hence the rise of democracy, and ultimately of anarchy, in the
elements.

Value is the highest amount of power that a man can assimilate--a
man, not mankind! Mankind is much more of a means than an end. It is a
question of type: mankind is merely the experimental material; it is
the overflow of the ill-constituted--a field of ruins.

Words relating to values are merely banners planted on those spots
where a new blessedness was discovered--a new feeling.

The standpoint of "value" is the same as that of the conditions of
preservation and enhancement, in regard to complex creatures of
relative stability appearing in the course of evolution.

There are no such things as lasting and ultimate entities, no atoms, no
monads: here also "permanence" was first introduced by ourselves (from
practical, utilitarian, and other motives).

"The forms that rule"; the sphere of the subjugated is continually
extended; or it decreases or increases according to the conditions
(nourishment) being either favourable or unfavourable.

"Value" is essentially the standpoint for the increase or decrease of
these dominating centres (pluralities in any case; for "unity" cannot
be observed anywhere in the nature of development).

The means of expression afforded by language are useless for the
purpose of conveying any facts concerning "development": the need of
positing a rougher world of stable existences and things forms part of
our eternal desire for preservation. We may speak of atoms and monads
in a relative sense: and this is certain, that the smallest world
is the most stable world .... There is no such thing as will: there
are only punctuations of will, which are constantly increasing and
decreasing their power.

III

THE WILL TO POWER AS EXEMPLIFIED IN SOCIETY AND THE INDIVIDUAL.

Society and the State.

We take it as a principle that only individuals feel any
responsibility. Corporations are invented to do what the individual
has not the courage to do. For this reason all communities are vastly
more upright and instructive, as regards the nature of man, than the
individual who is too cowardly to have the courage of his own desires.

All altruism is the prudence of the private man. societies are not
mutually altruistic. The commandment, "Thou shalt love thy next-door
neighbour," has never been extended to thy neighbour in general. Rather
what Manu says is probably truer: "We must conceive of all the States
on our own frontier, and their allies, as being hostile, and for the
same reason we must consider all of their neighbours as being friendly
to us."

The study of society is invaluable, because man in society is far more
childlike than man individually. Society has never regarded virtue as
anything else than as a means to strength, power, and order. Manu's
words again are simple and dignified: "Virtue could hardly rely on her
own strength alone. Really it is only the fear of punishment that keeps
men in their limits, and leaves every one in peaceful possession of his
own."

The State, or unmorality organised, is from within--the police, the
penal code, status, commerce, and the family; and from without, the
will to war, to power, to conquest and revenge.

A multitude will do things an individual will not, because of the
division of responsibility, of command and execution; because the
virtues of obedience, duty, patriotism, and local sentiment are all
introduced; because feelings of pride, severity, strength, hate,
and revenge in short, all typical traits are upheld, and these are
characteristics utterly alien to the herd-man.

You haven't, any of you, the courage either to kill or to flog a man.
But the huge machinery of the State quells the individual and makes him
decline to be answerable for his own deed (obedience, loyalty, etc.).

Everything that a man does in the service of the State is against his
own nature. Similarly, everything he learns in view of future service
of the State. This result is obtained through division of labour (so
that responsibility is subdivided too):--

The legislator--and he who fulfils the law.

The teacher of discipline--and those who have grown hard and severe
under discipline.

A division of labour among the emotions exists inside society, making
individuals and classes produce an imperfect, but more useful, kind
of soul. Observe how every type in society has become atrophied with
regard to certain emotions with the view of fostering and accentuating
other emotions.

Morality may be thus justified:--

Economically,--as aiming at the greatest possible use of all
individual power, with the view of preventing the waste of exceptional
natures.

AEsthetically,--as the formation of fixed types, and the pleasure in
one's own.

Politically,--as the art of bearing with the severe divergencies of
the degrees of power in society.

Psychologically, as an imaginary preference for the bungled and the
mediocre, in order to preserve the weak.

Man has one terrible and fundamental wish; he desires power, and this
impulse, which is called freedom, must be the longest restrained.
Hence ethics has instinctively aimed at such an education as shall
restrain the desire for power; thus our morality slanders the would-be
tyrant, and glorifies charity, patriotism, and the ambition of the herd.

Impotence to power, how it disguises itself and plays the hypocrite, as
obedience, subordination, the pride of duty and morality, submission,
devotion, love (the idolisation and apotheosis of the commander is a
kind of compensation, and indirect self-enhancement). It veils itself
further under fatalism and resignation, objectivity, self-tyranny,
stoicism, asceticism, self-abnegation, hallowing. Other disguises are:
criticism, pessimism, indignation, susceptibility, beautiful soul,
virtue, self--deification, philosophic detachment, freedom from contact
with the world (the realisation of impotence disguises itself as
disdain).

There is a universal need to exercise some kind of power, or to create
for one's self the appearance of some power, if only temporarily, in
the form of intoxication.

There are men who desire power simply for the sake of the happiness it
will bring; these belong chiefly to political parties. Other men have
the same yearning, even when power means visible disadvantages, the
sacrifice of their happiness, and well-being; they are the ambitious.
Other men, again, are only like dogs in a manger, and will have power
only to prevent its falling into the hands of others on whom they would
then be dependent.

If there be justice and equality before the law, what would thereby
be abolished?--Suspense, enmity, hatred. But it is a mistake to think
that you thereby increase happiness; for the Corsicans rejoice in more
happiness than the Continentals.

Reciprocity and the expectation of a reward is one of the most
seductive forms of the devaluation of mankind. It involves that
equality which depreciates any gulf as immoral.

Utility is entirely dependent upon the object to be attained,--the
wherefore? And this wherefore, this purpose, is again dependent upon
the degree of power. Utilitarianism is not, therefore, a fundamental
doctrine; it is only a story of sequels, and cannot be made obligatory
for all.

Of old, the State was regarded theoretically as a utilitarian
institution; it has now become so in a practical sense. The time of
kings has gone by, because people are no longer worthy of them. They do
not wish to see the symbol of their ideal in a king, but only a means
to their own ends. That's the whole truth.

I am trying to grasp the absolute sense of the communal standard of
judgment and valuation, naturally without any intention of deducing
morals.

The degree of psychological falsity and denseness required in order to
sanctify the emotions essential to preservation and expansion of power,
and to create a good conscience for them.

The degree of stupidity required in order that general rules and values
may remain possible (including education, formation of culture, and
training).

The degree of inquisitiveness, suspicion, and intolerance required in
order to deal with exceptions, to suppress them as criminals, and thus
to give them bad consciences, and to make them sick with their own
singularity.

Morality is essentially a shield, a means of defence; and, in so far,
it is a sign of the imperfectly developed man (he is still in armour;
he is still stoical).

The fully developed man is above all provided with weapons: he is a
man who attacks.

The weapons of war are converted into weapons of peace (out of scales
and carapaces grow feathers and hair).

The very notion, "living organism", implies that there must be
growth,--that there must be a striving after an extension of power,
and therefore a process of absorption of other forces. Under the
drowsiness brought on by moral narcotics, people speak of the right of
the individual to defend himself; on the same principle one might
speak of his right to attack: for both--and the latter more than
the former--are necessities where all living organisms are concerned:
aggressive and defensive egoism are not questions of choice or even of
"free will," but they are fatalities of life itself.

In this respect it is immaterial whether one have an individual, a
living body, or "an advancing society" in view. The right to punish
(or society's means of defence) has been arrived at only through a
misuse of the word "right": a right is acquired only by contract, but
self-defence and self-preservation do not stand upon the basis of a
contract. A people ought at least, with quite as much justification, to
be able to regard its lust of power, either in arms, commerce, trade,
or colonisation, as a right the right of growth, perhaps.... When the
instincts of a society ultimately make it give up war and renounce
conquest, it is decadent: it is ripe for democracy and the rule of
shopkeepers. In the majority of cases, it is true, assurances of peace
are merely stupefying draughts.

The maintenance of the military State is the last means of adhering to
the great tradition of the past; or, where it has been lost, to revive
it. By means of it the superior or strong type of man is preserved,
and all institutions and ideas which perpetuate enmity and order of
rank in States, such as national feeling, protective tariffs, etc., may
on that account seem justified.

In order that a thing may last longer than a person (that is to say,
in order that a work may outlive the individual who has created it),
all manner of limitations and prejudices must be imposed upon people.
But how? By means of love, reverence, gratitude towards the person
who created the work, or by means of the thought that our ancestors
fought for it, or by virtue of the feeling that the safety of our
descendants will be secured if we uphold the work--for instance, the
polis. Morality is essentially the means of; making something survive
the individual, because it makes him of necessity a slave. Obviously
the aspect from above is different from the aspect from below, and
will lead to quite different interpretations. How is organised power
maintained?--By the fact that countless generations sacrifice
themselves to its cause.

Marriage, property, speech, tradition, race, family, people, and
State, are each links in a chain--separate parts which have a more
or less high or low origin. Economically they are justified by the
surplus derived from the advantages of uninterrupted work and multiple
production, as weighed against the disadvantages of greater expense
in barter and the difficulty of making things last. (The working
parts are multiplied, and yet remain largely idle. Hence the cost of
producing them is greater, and the cost of maintaining them by no means
inconsiderable.) The advantage consists in avoiding interruption and
incident loss. Nothing is more expensive than a start. "The higher the
standard of living, the greater will be the expense of maintenance,
nourishment, and propagation, as also the risk and the probability of
an utter fall on reaching the summit."

In bourgeois marriages, naturally in the best sense of the word
marriage, there is no question whatsoever of love any more than there
is of money. For on love no institution can be founded. The whole
matter consists in society giving leave to two persons to satisfy
their sexual desires under conditions obviously designed to safeguard
social order. Of course there must be a certain attraction between the
parties and a vast amount of good nature, patience, compatibility, and
charity in any such contract. But the word love should not be misused
as regards such a union. For two lovers, in the real and strong meaning
of the word, the satisfaction of sexual desire is unessential; it is a
mere symbol. For the one side, as I have already said, it is a symbol
of unqualified submission: for the other, a sign of condescension--a
sign of the appropriation of property. Marriage, as understood by the
real old nobility, meant the breeding forth of the race (but are there
any nobles nowadays? Quaeritur),--that is to say, the maintenance
of a fixed definite type of ruler, for which object husband and wife
were sacrificed. Naturally the first consideration here had nothing to
do with love; on the contrary! It did not even presuppose that mutual
sympathy which is the sine qua non of the bourgeois marriage. The
prime consideration was the interest of the race, and in the second
place came the interest of a particular class. But in the face of the
coldness and rigour and calculating lucidity of such a noble concept
of marriage as prevailed among every healthy aristocracy, like that
of ancient Athens, and even of Europe during the eighteenth century,
we warm-blooded animals, with our miserably oversensitive hearts, we
"moderns," cannot restrain a slight shudder. That is why love as a
passion, in the big meaning of this word, was invented for, and in, an
aristocratic community--where convention and abstinence are most severe.

Concerning the future of marriage. A super-tax on inherited property,
a longer term of military service for bachelors of a certain minimum
age within the community.

Privileges of all sorts for fathers who lavish boys upon the world, and
perhaps plural votes as well.

A medical certificate as a condition of any marriage, endorsed by the
parochial authorities, in which a series of questions addressed to the
parties and the medical officers must be answered ("family histories").

As a counter-agent to prostitution, or as its ennoblement, I would
recommend leasehold marriages (to last for a term of years or months),
with adequate provision for the children.

Every marriage to be warranted and sanctioned by a certain number of
good men and true, of the parish, as a parochial obligation.

Another commandment of philanthropy.--There are cases where to have a
child would be a crime--for example, for chronic invalids and extreme
neurasthenics. These people should be converted to chastity, and for
this purpose the music of Parsifal might at all events be tried. For
Parsifal himself, that born fool, had ample reasons for not desiring
to propagate. Unfortunately, however, one of the regular symptoms of
exhausted stock is the inability to exercise any self-restraint in the
presence of stimuli, and the tendency to respond to the smallest sexual
attraction. It would be quite a mistake, for instance, to think of
Leopardi as a chaste man. In such cases the priest and moralist play
a hopeless game: it would be far better to send for the apothecary.
Lastly, society here has a positive duty to fulfil, and of all the
demands that are made on it, there are few more urgent and necessary
than this one. Society as the trustee of life, is responsible to life
for every botched life that comes into existence, and as it has to
atone for such lives, it ought consequently to make it impossible for
them ever to see the light of day: it should in many cases actually
prevent the act of procreation, and may, without any regard for rank,
descent, or intellect, hold in readiness the most rigorous forms of
compulsion and restriction, and, under certain circumstances, have
recourse to castration. The Mosaic law, "Thou shalt do no murder," is
a piece of ingenuous puerility compared with the earnestness of this
forbidding of life to decadents, "Thou shalt not beget"!!! ... For
life itself recognises no solidarity or equality of rights between the
healthy and unhealthy parts of an organism. The latter must at all
cost be eliminated, lest the whole fall to pieces. Compassion for
decadents, equal rights for the physiologically botched--this would be
the very pinnacle of immorality, it would be setting up Nature's most
formidable opponent as morality itself!

There are some delicate and morbid natures, the so-called idealists,
who can never under any circumstances rise above a coarse, immature
crime: yet it is the great justification of their anaemic little
existence, it is the small requital for their lives of cowardice and
falsehood to have been for one instant at least--strong. But they
generally collapse after such an act.

In our civilised world we seldom hear of any but the bloodless,
trembling criminal, overwhelmed by the curse and contempt of society,
doubting even himself, and always belittling and belying his deeds--a
misbegotten sort of criminal; that is why we are opposed to the idea
that all great men have been criminals (only in the grand style, and
neither petty nor pitiful), that crime must be inherent in greatness
(this at any rate is the unanimous verdict of all those students of
human nature who have sounded the deepest waters of great souls). To
feel one's self adrift from all questions of ancestry, conscience, and
duty--this is the danger with which every great man is confronted.
Yet this is precisely what he desires: he desires the great goal, and
consequently the means thereto.

In times when man is led by reward and punishment, the class of man
which the legislator has in view is still of a low and primitive
type: he is treated as one treats a child. In our latter-day culture,
general degeneracy removes all sense from reward and punishment. This
determination of action by the prospect of reward and punishment
presupposes young, strong, and vigorous races. In effete races impulses
are so irrepressible that a mere idea has no force whatever. Inability
to offer any resistance to a stimulus, and the feeling that one must
react to it: this excessive susceptibility of decadents makes all such
systems of punishment and reform altogether senseless.

The idea "amelioration" presupposes a normal and strong creature whose
action must in some way be balanced or cancelled if he is not to be
lost and turned into an enemy of the community.

The effect of prohibition. Every power which forbids and which knows
how to excite fear in the person forbidden creates a guilty conscience.
(That is to say, a person has a certain desire but is conscious of the
danger of gratifying it, and is consequently forced to be secretive,
underhand, and cautious.) Thus any prohibition deteriorates the
character of those who do not willingly submit themselves to it, but
are constrained thereto.

"Punishment and reward."--These two things stand or fall together.
Nowadays no one will accept a reward or acknowledge that any authority
should have the power to punish. Warfare has been reformed. We have
a desire: it meets with opposition: we then see that we shall most
easily obtain it by coming to some agreement--by drawing up a contract.
In modern society where every one has given his assent to a certain
contract, the criminal is a man who breaks that contract. This at least
is a clear concept. But in that case, anarchists and enemies of social
order could not be tolerated.

Crimes belong to the category of revolt against the social system, A
rebel is not punished, he is simply suppressed. He may be an utterly
contemptible and pitiful creature; but there is nothing intrinsically
despicable about rebellion in fact, in our particular society revolt is
far from being disgraceful. There are cases in which a rebel deserves
honour precisely because he is conscious of certain elements in society
which cry aloud for hostility; for such a man rouses us from our
slumbers. When a criminal commits but one crime against a particular
person, it does not alter the fact that all his instincts urge him
to make a stand against the whole social system. His isolated act is
merely a symptom.

The idea of punishment ought to be reduced to the concept of the
suppression of revolt, a weapon against the vanquished (by means of
long or short terms of imprisonment). But punishment should not be
associated in any way with contempt. A criminal is at all events a man
who has set his life, his honour, his freedom at stake; he is therefore
a man of courage. Neither should punishment be regarded as penance or
retribution, as though there were some recognised rate of exchange
between crime and punishment. Punishment does not purify, simply
because crime does not sully.

A criminal should not be prevented from making his peace with society,
provided he does not belong to the race of criminals. In the latter
case, however, he should be opposed even before he has committed an
act of hostility. (As soon as he gets into the clutches of society the
first operation to be performed upon him should be that of castration.)
A criminal's bad manners and his low degree of intelligence should
not be reckoned against him. Nothing is more common than that he
should misunderstand himself (more particularly when his rebellious
instinct--the rancour of the unclassed--has not reached consciousness
simply because he has not read enough). It is natural that he should
deny and dishonour his deed while under the influence of fear at
its failure. All this is quite distinct from those cases in which,
psychologically speaking, the criminal yields to an incomprehensible
impulse, and attributes a motive to his deed by associating it with a
merely incidental and insignificant action (for example, robbing a man,
when his real desire was to take his blood).

The worth of a man should not be measured by any one isolated act.
Napoleon warned us against this. Deeds which are only skin-deep are
more particularly insignificant. If we have no crime--let us say no
murder--on our conscience; why is it? It simply means that a few
favourable circumstances have been wanting in our lives. And supposing
we were induced to commit such a crime would our worth be materially
affected? As a matter of fact, we should only be despised, if we were
not credited with possessing the power to kill a man under certain
circumstances. In nearly every crime certain qualities come into play
without which no one would be a true man. Dostoievsky was not far wrong
when he said of the inmates of the penal colonies in Siberia, that they
constituted the strongest and most valuable portion of the Russian
people. The fact that in our society the criminal happens to be a badly
nourished and stunted animal is simply a condemnation of our system. In
the days of the Renaissance the criminal was a flourishing specimen of
humanity, and acquired his own virtue for himself,--Virtue in the sense
of the Renaissance--that is to say, virtu; free from moralic acid.

It is only those whom we do not despise that we are able to elevate.
Moral contempt is a far greater indignity and insult than any kind of
crime.

Shame was first introduced into punishment when certain penalties
were inflicted on persons held in contempt, such as slaves. It was a
despised class that was most frequently punished, and thus it came to
pass that punishment and contempt were associated.

In the ancient idea of punishment a religious concept was immanent,
namely, the retributive power of chastisement. Penalties purified; in
modern society, however, penalties degrade. Punishment is a form of
paying off a debt: once it has been paid, one is freed from the deed
for which one was so ready to suffer. Provided belief in the power of
punishment exist, once the penalty is paid a feeling of relief and
lightheartedness results, which is not so very far removed from a state
of convalescence and health. One has made one's peace with society,
and one appears to one's self more dignified pure.... To-day, however,
punishment isolates even more than the crime; the fate behind the sin
has become so formidable that it is almost hopeless. One rises from
punishment still an enemy of society. Henceforward it reckons yet
another enemy against it. The jus talionis may spring from the spirit
of retribution (that is to say, from a sort of modification of the
instinct of revenge); but in the Book of Manu, for instance, it is the
need of having some equivalent in order to do penance, or to become
free in a religious sense.

My pretty radical note of interrogation in the case of all more
modern laws of punishment is this: should not the punishment fit the
crime?--for in your heart of hearts thus would you have it. But then
the susceptibility of the particular criminal to pain would have to
be taken into account. In other words, there should be no such thing
as a preconceived penalty for any crime--no fixed penal code. But as
it would be no easy matter to ascertain the degree of sensitiveness
of each individual criminal, punishment would have to be abolished in
practice? What a sacrifice! Is it not? Consequently ...

Ah! and the philosophy of jurisprudence! That is a science which, like
all moral sciences, has not even been wrapped in swaddling-clothes yet.
Even among jurists who consider themselves liberal, the oldest and
most valuable significance of punishment is still misunderstood--it
is not even known. So long as jurisprudence does not build upon a new
foundation--on history and comparative anthropology--it will never
cease to quarrel over the fundamentally false abstractions which are
fondly imagined to be the "philosophy of law," and which have nothing
whatever to do with modern man. The man of to-day, however, is such a
complicated woof even in regard to his legal valuation that he allows
of the most varied interpretation.

An old Chinese sage once said he had heard that when mighty empires
were doomed they began to have numberless laws.

Schopenhauer would have all rapscallions castrated, and all geese shut
up in convents. But from what point of view would this be desirable?
The rascal has at least this advantage over other men--that he is not
mediocre; and the fool is superior to us inasmuch as he does not suffer
at the sight of mediocrity. It would be better to widen the gulf--that
is to say, roguery and stupidity should be increased. In this way human
nature would become broader ... but, after all, this is Fate, and
it will happen, whether we desire it or not. Idiocy and roguery are
increasing: this is part of modern progress.

Society, to-day, is full of consideration, tact, and reticence, and of
good-natured respect for other people's rights--even for the exactions
of strangers. To an even greater degree is there a certain charitable
and instinctive depreciation of the worth of man as shown by all
manner of trustful habits. Respect for men, and not only for the most
virtuous, is perhaps the real parting of the ways between us and the
Christian mythologists also have our good share of irony even when
listening to moral sermons. He who preaches morality to us debases
himself in our eyes and becomes almost comical. Liberal-mindedness
regarding morality is one of the best signs of our age. In cases where
it is most distinctly wanting, we regard it as a sign of a morbid
condition (the case of Carlyle in England, of Ibsen in Norway, and
Schopenhauer's pessimism throughout Europe). If there is anything
which can reconcile us to our own age, it is precisely the amount
of immorality which it allows itself without falling in its own
estimation--very much the reverse! In what, then, does the superiority
of culture over the want of culture consist--of the Renaissance, for
instance, over the Middle Ages? In this alone: the greater quantity of
acknowledged immorality. From this it necessarily follows that the very
zenith of human development must be regarded by the moral fanatic
as the non plus ultra of corruption (in this connection let us recall
Savonarola's judgment of Florence, Plato's indictment of Athens under
Pericles, Luther's condemnation of Rome, Rousseau's anathemas against
the society of Voltaire, and Germany's hostility to Goethe).

A little more fresh air, for Heaven's sake! This ridiculous condition
of Europe must not last any longer. Is there a single idea behind
this bovine nationalism? What possible value can there be in
encouraging this arrogant self-conceit when everything to-day points
to greater and more common interests?--at a moment when the spiritual
dependence and denationalisation, which are obvious to all, are paving
the way for the reciprocal rapprochements and fertilisations which
make up the real value and sense of present-day culture! ... And it is
precisely now that "the new German Empire" has been founded upon the
most thread-bare and discredited of ideas--universal suffrage and equal
right for all.

Think of all this struggling for advantage among conditions which are
in every way degenerate: of this culture of big cities, of newspapers,
of hurry and scurry, and of "aimlessness"! The economic unity of
Europe must necessarily come--and with it, as a reaction, the pacivist
movement.

A pacivist party, free from all sentimentality, which forbids its
children to wage war; which forbids recourse to courts of justice;
which forswears all fighting, all contradiction, and all persecution:
for a while the party of the oppressed, and later the powerful
party:--this party would be opposed to everything in the shape of
revenge and resentment.

There will also be a war party, exercising the same thoroughness and
severity towards itself, which will proceed in precisely the opposite
direction.

The princes of Europe should really consider whether as a matter of
fact they can dispense with our services--with us, the immoralists. We
are to-day the only power which can win a victory without allies: and
we are therefore far and away the strongest of the strong. We can even
do without lying, and let me ask what other power can dispense with
this weapon? A strong temptation fights for us; the strongest, perhaps,
that exists--the temptation of truth.... Truth? How do I come by this
word? I must withdraw it: I must repudiate this proud word. But no. We
do not even want it--we shall be quite able to achieve our victory of
power without its help. The real charm which fights for us, the eye
of Venus which our opponents themselves deaden and blind--this charm
is the magic of the extreme. The fascination which everything extreme
exercises: we immoralists--we are in every way the extremists.

The corrupted ruling classes have brought ruling into evil odour. The
State administration of justice is a piece of cowardice, because the
great man who can serve as a standard is lacking. At last the feeling
of insecurity becomes so great that men fall in the dust before any
sort of will-power that commands.

"The will to power" is so loathed in democratic ages that the whole of
the psychology of these ages seems directed towards its belittlement
and slander. The types of men who sought the highest honours are said
to have been Napoleon! Caesar! and Alexander!--as if these had not been
precisely the greatest scorners of honour.

And Helvetius would fain show us that we strive after power in order
to have those pleasures which are at the disposal of the mighty--that
is to say, according to him, this striving after power is the will to
pleasure--hedonism!

According as to whether a people feels: "the rights, the keenness of
vision, and the gifts of leading, etc., are with the few" or "with the
many"--it constitutes En oligarchic or a democratic community.

Monarchy represents the belief in a man who is completely superior a
leader, a saviour, a demigod.

Aristocracy represents the belief in a chosen few--in a higher caste.

Democracy represents the disbelief in all great men and in all elite
societies: everybody is everybody else's equal, "At bottom we are all
herd and mob."

I am opposed to Socialism because it dreams ingenuously of goodness,
truth, beauty, and equal rights (anarchy pursues the same ideal, but in
a more brutal fashion).

I am opposed to parliamentary government and the power of the press,
because they are the means whereby cattle become masters.

The arming of the people means in the end the arming of the mob.

Socialists are particularly ridiculous in my eyes, because of their
absurd optimism concerning the "good man" who is supposed to be waiting
in their cupboard, and who will come into being when the present
order of society has been overturned and has made way for natural
instincts. But the opposing party is quite as ludicrous, because it
will not see the act of violence which lies beneath every law, the
severity and egoism inherent in every kind of authority. "I and my kind
will rule and prevail. Whoever degenerates will be either expelled
or annihilated."--This was the fundamental feeling of all ancient
legislation. The idea of a higher order of man is hated much more
profoundly than monarchs themselves. Hatred of aristocracy always uses
hatred of monarchy as a mask.

How treacherous are all parties! They bring to light something
concerning their leaders which the latter, perhaps, have hitherto kept
hidden beneath a bushel with consummate art.

Modern Socialism would fain create a profane counterpart to jesuitism:
everybody a perfect instrument. But as to the object of it all, the
purpose of it--this has not yet been ascertained.

The slavery of to-day: a piece of barbarism. Where are the masters
for whom these slaves work? One must not always expect the simultaneous
appearance of the two complementary castes of society.

Utility and pleasure are slave theories of life.

"The blessing of work" is an ennobling phrase for slaves. Incapacity
for leisure.

There is no such thing as a right to live, a right to work, or a right
to be happy: in this respect man is not different from the meanest worm.

We must undoubtedly think of these things as uncompromisingly as Nature
does: they preserve the species.

We should look upon the needs of the masses with ironic compassion:
they want something which we have got--Ah!

European democracy is only in a very slight degree the manifestation
of unfettered powers. It represents, above all, the unfettering of
laziness, fatigue, and weakness.

Concerning the future of the workman--Workmen men should learn to
regard their duties as soldiers do. They receive emoluments, incomes,
but they do not get wages!

There is no relationship between work done and money received;
the individual should, according to his kind, be so placed as to
perform the highest that is compatible with his powers.

Noblemen ought one day to live as the bourgeois do now--but above
them, distinguishing themselves by the simplicity of their wants--the
superior caste will then live in a poorer and simpler way and yet be in
possession of power.

For lower orders of mankind the reverse valuations hold good: it is a
matter of implanting "virtues" in them. Absolute commands, terrible
compulsory methods, in order that they may rise above mere ease in
life. The remainder may obey, but their vanity demands that they may
feel themselves dependent, not upon great men, but upon principles.

"The Atonement of all Sin?"

People speak of the profound injustice of the social arrangement, as
it the fact that one man is born in favourable circumstances and that
another is born in unfavourable ones--or that one should possess gifts
the other has not, were on the face of it an injustice. Among the
more honest of these opponents of society this is what is said: "We,
with all the bad, morbid, criminal qualities which we acknowledge we
possess, are only the inevitable result of the oppression for ages of
the weak by the strong"; thus they insinuate their evil natures into
the consciences of the ruling classes. They threaten and storm and
curse. They become virtuous from sheer indignation--they don't want
to have become bad men and canaille for nothing. The name for this
attitude, which is an invention of the last century, is, if I am not
mistaken, pessimism; and even that pessimism which is the outcome of
indignation. It is in this attitude of mind that history is judged,
that it is deprived of its inevitable fatality, and that responsibility
and even guilt is discovered in it. For the great desideratum is to
find guilty people in it. The botched and the bungled, the decadents
of all kinds, are revolted at themselves, and require sacrifices
in order that they may not slake their thirst for destruction upon
themselves (which might, indeed, be the most reasonable procedure). But
for this purpose they at least require a semblance of justification,
i.e. a theory according to which the fact of their existence, and of
their character, may be expiated by a scapegoat. This scapegoat may
be God,--in Russia such resentful atheists are not wanting,--or the
order of society, or education and upbringing, or the Jews, or the
nobles, or, finally, the well-constituted of every kind. "It is a sin
for a man to have been born in decent circumstances, for by so doing
he disinherits the others, he pushes them aside, he imposes upon them
the curse of vice and of work.... How can I be made answerable for my
misery; surely some one must be responsible for it, or I could not bear
to live."...

In short, resentful pessimism discovers responsible parties in order to
create a pleasurable sensation for itself--revenge.... "Sweeter than
honey"--thus does even old Homer speak of revenge.

The fact that such a theory no longer meets with understanding--or
rather, let us say, contempt is accounted for by that particle of
Christianity which still circulates in the blood of every one of us; it
makes us tolerant towards things simply because we scent a Christian
savour about them.... The Socialists appeal to the Christian instincts;
this is their really refined piece of cleverness.... Thanks to
Christianity, we have now grown accustomed to the superstitious concept
of a soul--of an immortal soul, of soul monads, which, as a matter of
fact, hails from somewhere else, and which has only become inherent in
certain cases--that is to say, become incarnate in them--by accident:
but the nature of these cases is not altered, let alone determined by
it. The circumstances of society, of relationship, and of history are
only accidents for the soul, perhaps misadventures: in any case, the
world is not their work. By means of the idea of soul the individual is
made transcendental; thanks to it, a ridiculous amount of importance
can be attributed to him.

As a matter of fact, it was Christianity which first induced the
individual to take up this position of judge of all things. It made
megalomania almost his duty: it has made everything temporary and
limited subordinate to eternal rights! What is the State, what is
society, what are historical laws, what is physiology to me? Thus
speaks something from beyond Becoming, an immutable entity throughout
history: thus speaks something immortal, something divine--it is the
soul!

Another Christian, but no less insane, concept has percolated even
deeper into the tissues of modern ideas: the concept of the equality
of all souls before God. In this concept the prototype of all theories
concerning equal rights is to be found. Man was first taught to
stammer this proposition religiously: later, it was converted into
a moral; no wonder he has ultimately begun to take it seriously, to
take it practically!--that is to say, politically, socialistically,
resento-pessimistically.

Wherever responsible circumstances or people have been looked for,
it was the instinct of revenge that sought them. This instinct of
revenge obtained such an ascendancy over man in the course of centuries
that the whole of metaphysics, psychology, ideas of society, and, above
all, morality, are tainted with it. Man has nourished this idea of
responsibility to such an extent that he has introduced the bacillus
of vengeance into everything. By means of it he has made God Himself
ill, and killed innocence in the universe, by tracing every condition
of things to acts of will, to intentions, to responsible agents. The
whole teaching of will, this most fatal fraud that has ever existed
in psychology hitherto, was invented essentially for the purpose of
punishment. It was the social utility of punishment that lent this
concept its dignity, its power, and its truth. The originator of that
psychology, that we shall call volitional psychology, must be sought in
those classes which had the right of punishment in their hands; above
all, therefore, among the priests who stood on the very pinnacle of
ancient social systems: these people wanted to create for themselves
the right to wreak revenge--they wanted to supply God with the
privilege of vengeance. For this purpose; man was declared "free": to
this end every action had to be regarded as voluntary, and the origin
of every deed had to be considered as lying in consciousness. But by
such propositions as these ancient psychology is refuted.

To-day, when Europe seems to have taken the contrary direction; when
we halcyonians would fain withdraw, dissipate, and banish the concept
of guilt and punishment with all our might from the world; when our
most serious endeavours are concentrated upon purifying psychology,
morality, history, nature, social institutions and privileges, and
even God Himself, from this filth; in whom must we recognise our most
mortal enemies? Precisely in those apostles of revenge and resentment,
in those who are par excellence pessimists from indignation, who make
it their mission to sanctify their filth with the name of "righteous
indignation."... We others, whose one desire is to reclaim innocence on
behalf of Becoming, would fain be the missionaries of a purer thought,
namely, that no one is responsible for man's qualities; neither God,
nor society, nor his parents, nor his ancestors, nor himself--in
fact, that no one is to blame for him ... The being who might be made
responsible for a man's existence, for the fact that he is constituted
in a particular way, or for his birth in certain circumstances and
in a certain environment, is absolutely lacking.--And it is a great
blessing that such a being is non-existent .... We are not the
result of an eternal design, of a will, of a desire: there is no
attempt being made with us to attain to an "ideal of perfection," to
an "ideal of happiness," to an "ideal of virtue,"--and we are just as
little the result of a mistake on God's part in the presence of which
He ought to feel uneasy (a thought which is known to be at the very
root of the Old Testament). There is not a place nor a purpose nor a
sense to which we can attribute our existence or our kind of existence.
In the first place, no one is in a position to do this: it is quite
impossible to judge, to measure, or to compare, or even to deny the
whole universe! And why?--For five reasons, all accessible to the man
of average intelligence: for instance, because there is no existence
outside the universe ... and let us say it again, this is a great
blessing, for therein lies the whole innocence of our lives.

The Individual.

Fundamental errors: to regard the herd as an aim instead of
the individual! The herd is only a means and nothing more! But
nowadays people are trying to understand the herd as they would an
individual, and to confer higher rights upon it than upon isolated
personalities. Terrible mistake!! In addition to this, all that makes
for gregariousness, e.g. sympathy, is regarded as the more valuable
side of our natures.

The individual is something quite new, and capable of creating
new things. He is something absolute, and all his actions are quite
his own. The individual in the end has to seek the valuation for his
actions in himself: because he has to give an individual meaning even
to traditional words and notions. His interpretation of a formula is at
least personal, even if he does not create the formula itself: at least
as an interpreter he is creative.

The "ego" oppresses and kills. It acts like an organic cell. It is
predatory and violent. It would fain regenerate itself--pregnancy. It
would fain give birth to its God and see all mankind at its feet.

Every living organism gropes around as far as its power permits, and
overcomes all that is weaker than itself: by this means it finds
pleasure in its own existence. The increasing "humanity" of this
tendency consists in the fact that we are beginning to feel ever more
subtly how difficult it is really to absorb others: while we could
show our power by injuring him, his will estranges him from us, and
thus makes him less susceptible of being overcome.

The degree of resistance which has to be continually overcome in order
to remain at the top, is the measure of freedom, whether for
individuals or for societies: freedom being understood as positive
power, as will to power. The highest form of individual freedom, of
sovereignty, would, according to this, in all probability be found not
five feet away from its opposite--that is to say, where the danger of
slavery hangs over life, like a hundred swords of Damocles. Let any one
go through the whole of history from this point of view: the ages when
the individual reaches perfect maturity, i.e. the free ages, when the
classical type, sovereign man, is attained to--these were certainly
not humane times!

There should be no choice: either one must be uppermost or
nethermost--like a worm, despised, annihilated, trodden upon. One
must have tyrants against one in order to become a tyrant, i.e. in
order to be free. It is no small advantage to have a hundred swords of
Damocles suspended over one: it is only thus that one learns to dance,
it is only thus that one attains to any freedom in one's movements.

Man more than any other animal was originally altruistic--hence
his slow growth (child) and lofty development. Hence, too, his
extraordinary and latest kind of egoism.--Beasts of prey are much more
individualistic.

A criticism of selfishness. The involuntary ingenuousness of La
Rochefoucauld, who believed that he was saying something bold, liberal,
and paradoxical (in his days, of course, truth in psychological matters
was something that astonished people) when he said. "Les grandes ames
ne sont pas celles qui ont moins de passions et plus de vertus que les
ames communes, mais seulement celles qui ont de plus grands desseins."
Certainly, John Stuart Mill (who calls Chamfort the noble and
philosophical La Rochefoucauld of the eighteenth century) recognises
in him merely an astute and keen-sighted observer of all that which is
the result of habitual selfishness in the human breast, and he adds: "A
noble spirit is unable to see the necessity of a constant observation
of baseness and contemptibility, unless it were to show against
what corrupting influences a lofty spirit and a noble character were
able to triumph."

The Morphology of the Feelings of Self.

First standpoint--To what extent are sympathy or communal
feelings, the lower or preparatory states, at a time when personal
self-esteem and initiative in valuation, on the part of individuals,
are not yet possible?

Second standpoint.--To what extent is the zenith of collective
self-esteem, the pride in the distinction of the clan, the feeling
of inequality and a certain abhorrence of mediation, of equal rights
and of reconciliation, the school for individual self-esteem? It may
be this in so far as it compels the individual to represent the pride
of the community --he is obliged to speak and act with tremendous
self-respect, because he stands for the community And the same
holds good when the individual regards himself as the instrument or
speaking-tube of a godhead.

Third standpoint.--To what extent do these forms of impersonality
invest the individual with enormous importance? In so far as higher
powers are using him as an intermediary: religious shyness towards
one's self is the condition of prophets and poets.

Fourth standpoint.--To what extent does responsibility for a whole
educate the individual in foresight, and give him a severe and
terrible hand, a calculating and cold heart, majesty of bearing and of
action--things which he would not allow himself if he stood only for
his own rights?

In short, collective self-esteem is the great preparatory school
for personal sovereignty. The noble caste is that which creates the
heritage of this faculty.

The disguised forms of will to power:--

The desire for freedom, for independence for equilibrium,
for peace, for co-ordination. Also that of the anchorite, the
"Free-Spirit." In its lowest form, the will to live at all costs--the
instinct of self-preservation.

Subordination, with the view of satisfying the will to power of a
whole community; submissiveness, the making of one's self indispensable
and useful to him who has the power; love, a secret path to the heart
of the powerful, in order to become his master.

The feeling of duty, conscience, the imaginary comfort of belonging
to a higher order than those who actually hold the reins of power;
the acknowledgment of an order of rank which allows of judging even
the more powerful, self-depreciation; the discovery of new codes of
morality (of which the Jews are a classical example).

Praise and gratitude as forms of will to power.--Praise and
gratitude for harvests, for good weather, victories, marriages, and
peace--all festivals need a subject on which feeling can be outpoured.
The desire is to make all good things that happen to one appear as
though they had been done to one: people will have a donor. The same
holds good of the work of art: people are not satisfied with it
alone, they must praise the artist.--What, then, is praise? It is a
sort of compensation for benefits received, a sort of giving back,
a manifestation of our power--for the man who praises assents to,
blesses, values, judges. he arrogates to himself the right to give
his consent to a thing, to be able to confer honours. An increased
feeling of happiness or of liveliness is also an increased feeling
of power, and it is as a result of this feeling that a man praises
(it is as the outcome of this feeling that he invents a donor, a
"subject"). Gratitude is thus revenge of a lofty kind: it is most
severely exercised and demanded where equality and pride both require
to be upheld--that is to say, where revenge is practised to its fullest
extent.

Concerning the Machiavellism of Power.

The will to power appears:--

Among the oppressed and slaves of all kinds, in the form of will
to "freedom": the mere fact of breaking loose from something seems to
be an end in itself (in a religio-moral sense: "One is only answerable
to one's own conscience"; "evangelical freedom," etc. etc.),

In the case of a stronger species, ascending to power, in the
form of the will to overpower. If this fails, then it shrinks to the
"will to justice"--that is to say, to the will to the same measure of
rights as the ruling caste possesses.

In the case of the strongest, richest, most independent, and
most courageous, in the form of "love of humanity," of "love of the
people," of the "gospel," of "truth" of "God," of "pity," of self
sacrifice," etc. etc.; in the form of overpowering, of deeds of
capture, of imposing service on some one, of an instinctive reckoning
of one's self as part of a great mass of power to which one attempts
to give a direction: the hero, the prophet, the Caesar, the Saviour,
the bell-wether. (The love of the sexes also belongs to this category,
it will overpower something, possess it utterly, and it looks like
self-abnegation. At bottom it is only the love of one's instrument, of
one's "horse"--the conviction that things belong to one because one is
in a position to use them.)

"Freedom," "Justice," "Love"!!!

Love.--Behold this love and pity of women--what could be more
egoistic? ... And when they do sacrifice themselves and their honour
or reputation, to whom do they sacrifice themselves? To the man? Is it
not rather to an unbridled desire? These desires are quite as selfish,
even though they may be beneficial to others and provoke gratitude.
... To what extent can such a hyperfoetation of one valuation sanctify
everything else!!

"Senses," "Passions.".--When the fear of the senses and of the
passions and of the desires becomes so great as to warn us against
them, it is already a symptom of weakness: extreme measures always
characterise abnormal conditions. That which is lacking here, or more
precisely that which is decaying, is the power to resist an impulse:
when one feels instinctively that one must yield,--that is to say, that
one must react,--then it is an excellent thing to avoid opportunities
(temptations).

The stimulation of the senses is only a temptation in so far as those
creatures are concerned whose systems are easily swayed and influenced:
on the other hand, in the case of remarkable constitutional obtuseness
and hardness, strong stimuli are necessary in order to set the
functions in motion. Dissipation can only be objected to in the case of
one who has no right to it; and almost all passions have fallen into
disrepute thanks to those who were not strong enough to convert them to
their own advantage.

One should understand that passions are open to the same objections as
illnesses: yet we should not be justified in doing without illnesses,
and still less without passions. We require the abnormal; we give life
a tremendous shock by means of these great illnesses.

In detail the following should be distinguished:--

The dominating passion, which may even bring the supremest form
of health with it: in this case the co-ordination of the internal
system and its functions to perform one task is best attained,--but
this is almost a definition of health.

The antagonism of the passions the double, treble, and multiple
soul in one breast:[6] this is very unhealthy; it is a sign of inner
ruin and of disintegration, betraying and promoting an internal dualism
and anarchy--unless, of course, one passion becomes master. Return to
health.

The juxtaposition of passions without their being either opposed
or united with one another. Very often transitory, and then, as soon
as order is established, this condition may be a healthy one. A most
interesting class of men belong to this order, the chameleons; they are
not necessarily at loggerheads with themselves, they are both happy and
secure, but they cannot develop--their moods lie side by side, even
though they may seem to lie far apart. They change, but they become
nothing.

[Footnote 6: This refers to Goethe's Faust. In Part I., Act I., Scene
11., we find Faust exclaiming in despair: "Two souls, alas! within my
bosom throne!" See Theodore Martin's Faust, translated into English
verse.--Tr.]

The quantitative estimate of aims and its influence upon the valuing
standpoint, the great and the small criminal. The greatness or
smallness of the aims will determine whether the doer feels respect for
himself with it all, or whether he feels pusillanimous and miserable.

The degree of intellectuality manifested in the means employed may
likewise influence our valuation. How differently the philosophical
innovator, experimenter, and man of violence stands out against
robbers, barbarians, adventurers!--There is a semblance of
disinterestedness in the former.

Finally, noble manners, bearing, courage, self-confidence,--how they
alter the value of that which is attained by means of them!

Concerning the optics of valuation:--

The influence of the greatness or smallness of the aims.

The influence of the intellectuality of the means. The influence of the
behaviour in action. The influence of success or failure. The influence
of opposing forces and their value. The influence of that which is
permitted and that which is forbidden.

The tricks by means of which actions, measures, and passions are
legitimised, which from an individual standpoint are no longer good
form or even in good taste.--

Art, which allows us to enter such strange worlds, makes them tasteful
to us.

Historians prove its justification and reason; travels, exoticism,
psychology, penal codes, the lunatic asylum, the criminal, sociology.

Impersonality (so that as media of a collective whole we allow
ourselves these passions and action--the Bar, juries, the bourgeois,
the soldier, the minister, the prince, society, "critics") makes us
feel that we are sacrificing something.

Preoccupations concerning one's self and one's eternal salvation are
not expressive either of a rich or of a self-confident nature, for the
latter lets all questions of eternal bliss go to the devil,--it is
not interested in such matters of happiness it is all power, deeds,
desires; it imposes itself upon things; it even violates things. The
Christian is a romantic hypochondriac who does not stand firmly on his
legs.

Whenever hedonistic views come to the front, one can always presuppose
the existence of pain and a certain ill-constitutedness.

"The growing autonomy of the individual"--Parisian philosophers like
M. Fouillee talk of such things: they would do well to study the
race moutonniere for a moment; for they belong to it. For Heaven's
sake open your eyes, ye sociologists who deal with the future! The
individual grew strong under quite opposite conditions: ye describe the
extremest weakening and impoverishment of man; ye actually want this
weakness and impoverishment, and ye apply the whole lying machinery of
the old ideal in order to achieve your end. Ye are so constituted that
ye actually regard your gregarious wants as an ideal! Here we are in
the presence of an absolute lack of psychological honesty.

The two traits which characterise the modern European are apparently
antagonistic individualism and the demand for equal rights: this I
am at last beginning to understand. The individual is an extremely
vulnerable piece of vanity: this vanity, when it is conscious of its
high degree of susceptibility to pain, demands that every one should
be made equal; that the individual should only stand inter pares.
But in this way a social race is depicted in which, as a matter of
fact, gifts and powers are on the whole equally distributed. The pride
which would have loneliness and but few appreciators is quite beyond
comprehension: really "great" successes are only attained through the
masses--indeed, we scarcely understand yet that a mob success is in
reality only a small success; because pulchrum est paucorum hominum.

No morality will countenance order of rank among men, and the jurists
know nothing of a communal conscience. The principle of individualism
rejects really great men, and demands the most delicate vision for,
and the speediest discovery of, a talent among people who are almost
equal; and inasmuch as every one has some modicum of talent in such
late and civilised cultures (and can, therefore, expect to receive his
share of honour), there is a more general buttering-up of modest merits
to-day than there has ever been. This gives the age the appearance of
unlimited justice. Its want of justice is to be found not in its
unbounded hatred of tyrants and demagogues, even in the arts; but in
its detestation of noble natures who scorn the praise of the many. The
demand for equal rights (that is to say, the privilege of sitting in
judgment on everything and everybody) is anti-aristocratic.

This age knows just as little concerning the absorption of the
individual, of his mergence into a great type of men who do not want to
be personalities. It was this that formerly constituted the distinction
and the zeal of many lofty natures (the greatest poets among them); or
of the desire to be a polis, as in Greece; or of Jesuitism, or of
the Prussian Staff Corps, and bureaucracy; or of apprenticeship and a
continuation of the tradition of great masters: to all of which things,
non-social conditions and the absence of petty vanity are necessary.

Individualism is a modest and still unconscious form of will to
power; with it a single human unit seems to think it sufficient to free
himself from the preponderating power of society (or of the State or
Church). He does not set himself up in opposition as a personality,
but merely as a unit; he represents the rights of all other individuals
as against the whole. That is to say, he instinctively places himself
on a level with every other unit: what he combats he does not combat as
a person, but as a representative of units against a mass.

Socialism is merely an agitatory measure of individualism: it
recognises the fact that in order to attain to something, men must
organise themselves into a general movement--into a "power." But what
the Socialist requires is not society as the object of the individual,
but society as a means of making many individuals possible: this is
the instinct of Socialists, though they frequently deceive themselves
on this point (apart from this, however, in order to make their kind
prevail, they are compelled to deceive others to an enormous extent).
Altruistic moral preaching thus enters into the service of individual
egoism,--one of the most common frauds of the nineteenth century.

Anarchy is also merely an agitatory measure of Socialism; with it
the Socialist inspires fear, with fear he begins to fascinate and to
terrorise: but what he does above all is to draw all courageous and
reckless people to his side, even in the most intellectual spheres.

In spite of all this, individualism is the most modest stage of the
will to power.

When one has reached a certain degree of independence, one always
longs for more: separation in proportion to the degree of force;
the individual is no longer content to regard himself as equal to
everybody, he actually seeks for his peer--he makes himself stand out
from others. Individualism is followed by a development in groups and
organs; correlative tendencies join up together and become powerfully
active: now there arise between these centres of power, friction,
war, a reconnoitring of the forces on either side, reciprocity,
understandings, and the regulation of mutual services. Finally, there
appears an order of rank.

Recapitulation--

The individuals emancipate themselves.

They make war, and ultimately agree concerning equal rights (justice
is made an end in itself).

Once this is reached, the actual differences in degrees of power
begin to make themselves felt, and to a greater extent than before (the
reason being that on the whole peace is established, and innumerable
small centres of power begin to create differences which formerly were
scarcely noticeable). Now the individuals begin to form groups, these
strive after privileges and preponderance, and war starts afresh in a
milder form.

People demand freedom only when they have no power. Once power is
obtained, a preponderance thereof is the next thing to be coveted; if
this is not achieved (owing to the fact that one is still too weak for
it), then "justice" i.e. "equality of power" become the objects of
desire.

The rectification of the concept "egoism."--When one has discovered
what an error the "individual" is, and that every single creature
represents the whole process of evolution (not alone "inherited," but
in "himself"), the individual then acquires an inordinately great
importance. The voice of instinct is quite right here. When this
instinct tends to decline, i.e. when the individual begins to seek
his worth in his services to others, one may be sure that exhaustion
and degeneration have set in. An altruistic attitude of mind, when
it is fundamental and free from all hypocrisy, is the instinct of
creating a second value for one's self in the service of other egoists.
As a rule, however, it is only apparent--a circuitous path to the
preservation of one's own feelings of vitality and worth.

The History of Moralisation and Demoralisation.

Proposition one.--There are no such things as moral actions: they
are purely imaginary. Not only is it impossible to demonstrate their
existence (a fact which Kant and Christianity, for instance, both
acknowledged) but they are not even possible. Owing to psychological
misunderstanding, a man invented an opposite to the instinctive
impulses of life, and believed that a new species of instinct was
thereby discovered: a primum mobile was postulated which does not
exist at all. According to the valuation which gave rise to the
antithesis "moral" and "immoral," one should say: There is nothing
else on earth but immoral intentions and actions.

Proposition two.----The whole differentiation, "moral" and "immoral,"
arises from the assumption that both moral and immoral actions are the
result of a spontaneous will--in short, that such a will exists; or in
other words, that moral judgments can only hold good with regard to
intuitions and actions that are free. But this whole order of actions
and intentions is purely imaginary: the only world to which the moral
standard could be applied does not exist at all: there is no such
thing as a moral or an immoral action.

The psychological error out of which the antithesis "moral" and
"immoral" arose is: "selfless," "unselfish," "self-denying"--all unreal
and fantastic.

A false dogmatism also clustered around the concept "ego"; it was
regarded as atomic, and falsely opposed to a non-ego; it was also
liberated from Becoming, and declared to belong to the sphere of
Being. The false materialisation of the ego: this (owing to the belief
in individual immortality) was made an article of faith under the
pressure of religio-moral discipline. According to this artificial
liberation of the ego and its transference to the realm of the
absolute, people thought that they had arrived at an antithesis in
values which seemed quite irrefutable--the single ego and the vast
non-ego. It seemed obvious that the value of the individual ego could
only exist in conjunction with the vast non-ego, more particularly in
the sense of being subject to it and existing only for its sake. Here,
of course, the gregarious instinct determined the direction of thought:
nothing is more opposed to this instinct than the sovereignty of the
individual. Supposing, however, that the ego be absolute, then its
value must lie in self-negation.

Thus: (1) the false emancipation of the "individual" as an atom;

The gregarious self-conceit which abhors the desire to remain an
atom, and regards it as hostile.

As a result: the overcoming of the individual by changing his aim.

At this point there appeared to be actions that were self-effacing:
around these actions a whole sphere of antitheses was fancied.

It was asked, in what sort of actions does man most strongly
assert himself? Around these (sexuality, covetousness, lust for power,
cruelty, etc. etc.) hate, contempt, and anathemas were heaped: it
was believed that there could be such things as selfless impulses.
Everything selfish was condemned, everything unselfish was in demand.

And the result was: what had been done? A ban had been placed
on the strongest, the most natural, yea, the only genuine impulses,
henceforward, in order that an action might be praiseworthy, there must
be no trace in it of any of those genuine impulses--monstrous fraud
in psychology. Every kind of "self-satisfaction" had to be remodelled
and made possible by means of misunderstanding and adjusting one's self
sub specie boni. Conversely: that species which found its advantage
in depriving mankind of its self-satisfaction, the representatives of
the gregarious instincts, e.g. the priests and the philosophers, were
sufficiently crafty and psychologically astute to show how selfishness
ruled everywhere. The Christian conclusion from this was: "Everything
is sin, even our virtues. Man is utterly undesirable. Selfless actions
are impossible." Original sin. In short, once man had opposed his
instincts to a purely imaginary world of the good, he concluded by
despising himself as incapable of performing "good" actions.

N.B. In this way Christianity represents a step forward in the
sharpening of psychological insight: La Rochefoucauld and Pascal. It
perceived the essential equality of human actions, and the equality of
their values as a whole (all immoral).

Now the first serious object was to rear men in whom self-seeking
impulses were extinguished. priests, saints. And if people doubted
that perfection was possible, they did not doubt what perfection was.

The psychology of the saint and of the priest and of the "good" man,
must naturally have seemed purely phantasmagorical. The real motive of
all action had been declared bad: therefore, in order to make action
still possible, deeds had to be prescribed which, though not possible,
had to be declared possible and sanctified. They now honoured and
idealised things with as much falsity as they had previously slandered
them.

Inveighing against the instincts of life came to be regarded as holy
and estimable. The priestly ideal was: absolute chastity, absolute
obedience, absolute poverty! The lay ideal: alms, pity, self-sacrifice,
renunciation of the beautiful, of reason, and of sensuality, and a dark
frown for all the strong qualities that existed.

An advance is made: the slandered instincts attempt to re-establish
their rights (e.g. Luther's Reformation, the coarsest form of
moral falsehood under the cover of "Evangelical freedom"), they are
rechristened with holy names.

The calumniated instincts try to demonstrate that they are necessary in
order that the virtuous instincts may be possible. Il faut vivre, afin
de vivre pour autrui: egoism as a means to an end.[7]

But people go still further: they try to grant both the egoistic and
altruistic impulses the right to exist--equal rights for both--from the
utilitarian standpoint.

People go further: they see greater utility in placing the egoistic
rights before the altruistic--greater utility in the sense of more
happiness for the majority, or of the elevation of mankind, etc. etc.
Thus the rights of egoism begin to preponderate, but under the cloak of
an extremely altruistic standpoint--the collective utility of humanity.

An attempt is made to reconcile the altruistic mode of action with the
natural order of things. Altruism is sought in the very roots of life.
Altruism and egoism are both based upon the essence of life and nature.

The disappearance of the opposition between them is dreamt of as a
future possibility. Continued adaptation, it is hoped, will merge the
two into one.

At last it is seen that altruistic actions are merely a species of the
egoistic--and that the degree to which one loves and spends one's self
is a proof of the extent of one's individual power and personality. In
short, that the more evil man can be made, the better he is, and that
one cannot be the one without the other. At this point the curtain
rises which concealed the monstrous fraud of the psychology that has
prevailed hitherto.

Results.--There are only immoral intentions and actions; the
so-called moral actions must be shown to be immoral. All emotions are
traced to a single will, the will to power, and are called essentially
equal. The concept of life: in the apparent antithesis good and evil,
degrees of power in the instincts alone are expressed. A temporary
order of rank is established according to which certain instincts are
either controlled or enlisted in our service. Morality is justified:
economically, etc.

Against proposition two.--Determinism: the attempt to rescue the moral
world by transferring it to the unknown.

Determinism is only a manner of allowing ourselves to conjure our
valuations away, once they have lost their place in a world interpreted
mechanistically. Determinism must therefore be attacked and undermined
at all costs: just as our right to distinguish between an absolute and
phenomenal world should be disputed.

[Footnote 7: Spencer's conclusion in the Data of Ethics.--Tr.]

It is absolutely necessary to emancipate ourselves from motives:
otherwise we should not be allowed to attempt to sacrifice ourselves
or to neglect ourselves! Only the innocence of Becoming gives us the
highest courage and the highest freedom.

A clean conscience must be restored to the evil man--has this been my
involuntary endeavour all the time? for I take as the evil man him
who is strong (Dostoievsky's belief concerning the convicts in prison
should be referred to here).

Our new "freedom." What a feeling of relief there is in the thought
that we emancipated spirits do not feel ourselves harnessed to any
system of teleological aims. Likewise that the concepts reward and
punishment have no roots in the essence of existence! Likewise that
good and evil actions are not good or evil in themselves, but only
from the point of view of the self-preservative tendencies of certain
species of humanity! Likewise that our speculations concerning pleasure
and pain are not of cosmic, far less then of metaphysical, importance!
(That form of pessimism associated with the name of Hartmann, which
pledges itself to put even the pain and pleasure of existence into
the balance, with its arbitrary confinement in the prison and within
the bounds of pre-Copernican thought, would be something not only
retrogressive, but degenerate, unless it be merely a bad joke on the
part of a "Berliner."[8])

[Footnote 8: "Berliner"--The citizens of Berlin are renowned in Germany
for their poor jokes.--Tr.]

If one is clear as to the "wherefore" of one's life, then the "how" of
it can take care of itself.

It is already even a sign of disbelief in the wherefore and in the
purpose and sense of life--in fact, it is a sign of a lack of
will--when the value of pleasure and pain step into the foreground,
and hedonistic and pessimistic teaching becomes prevalent; and
self-abnegation, resignation, virtue, "objectivity," may, at the very
least, be signs that the most important factor is beginning to make its
absence felt.

Hitherto there has been no German culture. It is no refutation of this
assertion to say that there have been great anchorites in Germany
(Goethe, for instance); for these had their own culture. But it was
precisely around them, as though around mighty, defiant, and isolated
rocks, that the remaining spirit of Germany, as their antithesis,
lay that is to say, as a soft, swampy, slippery soil, upon which every
step and every footprint of the rest of Europe made an impression and
created forms. German culture was a thing devoid of character and of
almost unlimited yielding power.

Germany, though very rich in clever and well-informed scholars, has
for some time been so excessively poor in great souls and in mighty
minds, that it almost seems to have forgotten what a great soul or
a mighty mind is; and to-day mediocre and even ill-constituted men
place themselves in the market square without the suggestion of a
conscience-prick or a sign of embarrassment, and declare themselves
great men, reformers, etc. Take the case of Eugen Duhring, for
instance, a really clever and well-informed scholar, but a man who
betrays with almost every word he says that he has a miserably small
soul, and that he is horribly tormented by narrow envious feelings;
moreover, that it is no mighty overflowing, benevolent, and spendthrift
spirit that drives him on, but only the spirit of ambition! But to be
ambitious in such an age as this is much more unworthy of a philosopher
than ever it was: to-day, when it is the mob that rules, when it is the
mob that dispenses the honours.

My "future": a severe polytechnic education. Conscription; so that as
a rule every man of the higher classes should be an officer, whatever
else he may be besides.

IV.

THE WILL TO POWER IN ART.

Our religion, morality, and philosophy are decadent human institutions.
The counter-agent. Art.

The Artist-philosopher. A higher concept of art. Can man stand at
so great a distance from his fellows as to mould them? (Preliminary
exercises thereto:--

To become a self-former, an anchorite.

To do what artists have done hitherto, i.e. to reach a small
degree of perfection in a certain medium.)

Art as it appears without the artist, i.e. as a body, an organisation
(the Prussian Officers' Corps, the Order of the Jesuits). To what
extent is the artist merely a preliminary stage? The world regarded as
a self-generating work of art.

The phenomenon, "artist," is the easiest to see through: from it one
can look down upon the fundamental instincts of power, of nature, etc.,
even of religion and morality.

"Play," uselessness--as the ideal of him who is overflowing with power,
as the ideal of the child. The childishness of God, pais paizohn.

Apollonian, Dionysian. There are two conditions in which art
manifests itself in man even as a force of nature, and disposes of
him whether he consent or not: it may be as a constraint to visionary
states, or it may be an orgiastic impulse. Both conditions are to be
seen in normal life, but they are then somewhat weaker: in dreams and
in moments of elation or intoxication.[9]

But the same contrast exists between the dream state and the state of
intoxication; both of these states let loose all manner of artistic
powers within us, but each unfetters powers of a different kind.
Dreamland gives us the power of vision, of association, of poetry:
intoxication gives us the power of grand attitudes, of passion, of
song, and of dance.

[Footnote 9: German: "Rausch."--There is no word in English for the
German expression "Rausch." When Nietzsche uses it, he means a sort of
blend of our two words: intoxication and elation.--Tr.]

Sexuality and voluptuousness belong to the Dionysiac intoxication:
but neither of them is lacking in the Apollonian state. There is also
a difference of tempo between the states.... The extreme peace of
certain feelings of intoxication (or, more strictly, the slackening
of the feeling of time, and the reduction of the feeling of space) is
wont to reflect itself in the vision of the most restful attitudes
and states of the soul. The classical style essentially represents
repose, simplification, foreshortening, and concentration--the highest
feeling of power is concentrated in the classical type. To react with
difficulty: great consciousness: no feeling of strife.

The feeling of intoxication is, as a matter of fact, equivalent to a
sensation of surplus power: it is strongest in seasons of rut: new
organs, new accomplishments, new colours, new forms. Embellishment is
an outcome of increased power. Embellishment is merely an expression
of a triumphant will, of an increased state of co-ordination, of a
harmony of all the strong desires, of an infallible and perpendicular
equilibrium. Logical and geometrical simplification is the result of an
increase of power: conversely, the mere aspect of such a simplification
increases the sense of power in the beholder.... The zenith of
development: the grand style.

Ugliness signifies the decadence of a type: contradiction and
faulty co-ordination among the inmost desires--this means a decline
in the organising power, or, psychologically speaking, in the will.
The condition of pleasure which is called intoxication is really
an exalted feeling of power. ... Sensations of space and time are
altered; inordinate distances are traversed by the eye, and only then
become visible; the extension of the vision over greater masses and
expanses; the refinement of the organ which apprehends the smallest
and most elusive things; divination, the power of understanding at the
slightest hint, at the smallest suggestion; intelligent sensitiveness;
strength as a feeling of dominion in the muscles, as agility and
love of movement, as dance, as levity and quick time; strength as the
love of proving strength, as bravado, adventurousness, fearlessness,
indifference in regard to life and death.... All these elated moments
of life stimulate each other; the world of images and of imagination
of the one suffices as a suggestion for the other: in this way states
finally merge into each other, which might do better to keep apart,
e.g. the feeling of religious intoxication and sexual irritability
(two very profound feelings, always wonderfully co-ordinated. What is
it that pleases almost all pious women, old or young? Answer: a saint
with beautiful legs, still young, still innocent). Cruelty in tragedy
and pity (likewise normally correlated). Spring-time, dancing, music,
--all these things are but the display of one sex before the other,--as
also that "infinite yearning of the heart" peculiar to Faust.

Artists when they are worth anything at all are men of strong
propensities (even physically), with surplus energy, powerful animals,
sensual; without a certain overheating of the sexual system a man like
Raphael is unthinkable.... To produce music is also in a sense to
produce children; chastity is merely the economy of the artist, and
in all creative artists productiveness certainly ceases with sexual
potency.... Artists should not see things as they are; they should
see them fuller, simpler, stronger: to this end, however, a kind of
youthfulness, of vernality, a sort of perpetual elation, must be
peculiar to their lives.

The states in which we transfigure things and make them fuller, and
rhapsodise about them, until they reflect our own fulness and love
of life back upon us: sexuality, intoxication, post-prandial states,
spring, triumph over our enemies, scorn, bravado, cruelty, the ecstasy
of religious feeling. But three elements above all are active:
sexuality, intoxication, cruelty; all these belong to the oldest
festal joys of mankind, they also preponderate in budding artists.

Conversely: there are things with which we meet which already show
us this transfiguration and fulness, and the animal world's response
thereto is a state of excitement in the spheres where these states
of happiness originate. A blending of these very delicate shades of
animal well-being and desires is the aesthetic state. The latter only
manifests itself in those natures which are capable of that spendthrift
and overflowing fulness of bodily vigour; the latter is always the
primum mobile. The sober-minded man, the tired man, the exhausted and
dried-up man (e.g. the scholar), can have no feeling for art, because
he does not possess the primitive force of art, which is the tyranny
of inner riches: he who cannot give anything away cannot feel anything
either.

"Perfection"--In these states (more particularly in the case of
sexual love) there is an ingenuous betrayal of what the profoundest
instinct regards as the highest, the most desirable, the most valuable,
the ascending movement of its type; also of the condition towards which
it is actually striving. Perfection: the extraordinary expansion of
this instinct's feeling of power, its riches, its necessary overflowing
of all banks.

Art reminds us of states of physical vigour: it may be the overflow and
bursting forth of blooming life in the world of pictures and desires;
on the other hand, it may be an excitation of the physical functions by
means of pictures and desires of exalted life--an enhancement of the
feeling of life, the latter's stimulant.

To what extent can ugliness exercise this power? In so far as it may
communicate something of the triumphant energy of the artist who has
become master of the ugly and the repulsive; or in so far as it gently
excites our lust of cruelty (in some circumstances even the lust of
doing harm to ourselves, self-violence, and therewith the feeling of
power over ourselves).

"Beauty" therefore is, to the artist, something which is above all
order of rank, because in beauty contrasts are overcome, the highest
sign of power thus manifesting itself in the conquest of opposites;
and achieved without a feeling of tension: violence being no longer
necessary, everything submitting and obeying so easily, and doing so
with good grace; this is what delights the powerful will of the artist.

The biological value of beauty and ugliness. That which we feel
instinctively opposed to us aesthetically is, according to the longest
experience of mankind, felt to be harmful, dangerous, and worthy of
suspicion: the sudden utterance of the aesthetic instinct, e.g. in the
case of loathing, implies an act of judgment. To this extent beauty
lies within the general category of the biological values, useful,
beneficent, and life-promoting: thus, a host of stimuli which for
ages have been associated with, and remind us of, useful things and
conditions, give us the feeling of beauty, i.e. the increase of the
feeling of power (not only things, therefore, but the sensations which
are associated with such things or their symbols). In this way beauty
and ugliness are recognised as determined by our most fundamental
self-preservative values. Apart from this, it is nonsense to postulate
anything as beautiful or ugly. Absolute beauty exists just as little
as absolute goodness and truth. In a particular case it is a matter of
the self-preservative conditions of a certain type of man: thus the
gregarious man will have quite a different feeling for beauty from the
exceptional or super-man.

It is the optics of things in the foreground which only consider
immediate consequences, from which the value beauty (also goodness and
truth) arises.

All instinctive judgments are short-sighted in regard to the
concatenation of consequences: they merely advise what must be done
forthwith. Reason is essentially an obstructing apparatus preventing
the immediate response to instinctive judgments: it halts, it
calculates, it traces the chain of consequences further.

Judgments concerning beauty and ugliness are short-sighted (reason is
always opposed to them): but they are convincing in the highest degree;
they appeal to our instincts in that quarter where the latter decide
most quickly and say yes or no with least hesitation, even before
reason can interpose.

The most common affirmations of beauty stimulate each other
reciprocally; where the aesthetic impulse once begins to work, a
whole host of other and foreign perfections crystallise around the
"particular form of beauty." It is impossible to remain objective, it
is certainly impossible to dispense with the interpreting, bestowing,
transfiguring, and poetising power (the latter is a stringing together
of affirmations concerning beauty itself). The sight of a beautiful
woman....

Thus (1) judgment concerning beauty is short-sighted; it sees only the
immediate consequences.

It smothers the object which gives rise to it with a charm that is
determined by the association of various judgments concerning beauty,
which, however, are quite alien to the essence of the particular
object. To regard a thing as beautiful is necessarily to regard it
falsely (that is why incidentally love marriages are from the social
point of view the most unreasonable form of matrimony).

Concerning the genesis of Art. That making perfect and seeing
perfect, which is peculiar to the cerebral system overladen with sexual
energy (a lover alone with his sweetheart at eventide transfigures the
smallest details: life is a chain of sublime things, "the misfortune
of an unhappy love affair is more valuable than anything else"); on
the other hand, everything perfect and beautiful operates like an
unconscious recollection of that amorous condition and of the point of
view peculiar to it--all perfection, and the whole of the beauty of
things, through contiguity, revives aphrodisiac bliss. (Physiologically
it is the creative instinct of the artist and the distribution of
his semen in his blood.) The desire for art and beauty is an indirect
longing for the ecstasy; of sexual desire, which gets communicated to
the brain. The world become perfect through "love."

Sensuality in its various disguises.--(1) As idealism (Plato), common
to youth, constructing a kind of concave-mirror in which the image of
the beloved is an incrustation, an exaggeration, a transfiguration, an
attribution of infinity to everything. (2) In the religion of love, "a
fine young man," "a beautiful woman," in some way divine; a bridegroom,
a bride of the soul. (3) In art, as a decorating force, e.g. just as
the man sees the woman and makes her a present of everything that can
enhance her personal charm, so the sensuality of the artist adorns an
object with everything else that he honours and esteems, and by this
means perfects it (or idealises it). Woman, knowing what man feels
in regard to her, tries to meet his idealising endeavours half-way
by decorating herself, by walking and dancing well, by expressing
delicate thoughts: in addition, she may practise modesty, shyness,
reserve--prompted by her instinctive feeling that the idealising
power of man increases with all this, (In the extraordinary finesse
of woman's instincts, modesty must not by any means be considered as
conscious hypocrisy: she guesses that it is precisely artlessness and
real shame which seduces man most and urges him to an exaggerated
esteem of her. On this account, woman is ingenuous, owing to the
subtlety of her instincts which reveal to her the utility of a state of
innocence. A wilful closing of one's eyes to one's self.... Wherever
dissembling has a stronger influence by being unconscious it actually
becomes unconscious.)

What a host of things can be accomplished by the state of intoxication
which is called by the name of love, and which is something else
besides love!--And yet everybody has his own experience of this matter.
The muscular strength of a girl suddenly increases as soon as a man
comes into her presence: there are instruments with which this can be
measured. In the case of a still closer relationship of the sexes,
as, for instance, in dancing and in other amusements which society
gatherings entail, this power increases to such an extent as to make
real feats of strength possible: at last one no longer trusts either
one's eyes, or one's watch! Here at all events we must reckon with the
fact that dancing itself, like every form of rapid movement, involves
a kind of intoxication of the whole nervous, muscular, and visceral
system. We must therefore reckon in this case with the collective
effects of a double intoxication.--And how clever it is to be a little
off your head at times! There are some realities which we cannot admit
even to ourselves: especially when; we are women and have all sorts
of feminine, "pudeurs."...Those young creatures dancing over there
are obviously beyond all reality: they are dancing only with a host
of tangible ideals: what is more, they even see ideals sitting around
them, their mothers!... An opportunity for quoting Faust. They look
incomparably fairer, do these pretty creatures, when they have lost
their head a little; and how well they know it too, they are even more
delightful because they know it! Lastly, it is their finery which
inspires them; their finery is their third little intoxication. They
believe in their dressmaker as in their God: and who would destroy this
faith in them? Blessed is this faith! And self-admiration is healthy!
Self-admiration can protect one even from cold! Has a beautiful woman,
who knew she was well-dressed, ever caught cold? Never yet on this
earth! I even suppose a case in which she has scarcely a rag on her.

If one should require the most astonishing proof of how far the power
of transfiguring, which comes of intoxication, goes, this proof is
at hand in the phenomenon of love; or what is called love in all
the languages and silences of the world. Intoxication works to such
a degree upon reality in this passion that in the consciousness of
the lover the cause of his love is quite suppressed, and something
else seems to take its place,--a vibration and a glitter of all the
charm-mirrors of Circe.... In this respect to be man or an animal
makes no difference: and still less does spirit, goodness, or honesty.
If one is astute, one is befooled astutely; if one is thick-headed,
one is befooled in a thick-headed way. But love, even the love of
God, saintly love, "the love that saves the soul," are at bottom all
one; they are nothing but a fever which has reasons to transfigure
itself--a state of intoxication which does well to lie about itself....
And, at any rate, when a man loves, he is a good liar about himself
and to himself: he seems to himself transfigured, stronger, richer,
more perfect; he is more perfect.... Art here acts as an organic
function: we find it present in the most angelic instinct "love";
we find it as the greatest stimulus of life--thus art is sublimely
utilitarian, even in the fact that it lies.... But we should be wrong
to halt at its power to lie: it does more than merely imagine; it
actually transposes values. And it not only transposes the feeling
for values: the lover actually has a greater value; he is stronger.
In animals this condition gives rise to new weapons, colours, pigments,
and forms, and above all to new movements, new rhythms, new love-calls
and seductions. In man it is just the same. His whole economy is
richer, mightier, and more complete when he is in love than when he
is not. The lover becomes a spendthrift; he is rich enough for it. He
now dares; he becomes an adventurer, and even a donkey in magnanimity
and innocence; his belief in God and in virtue revives, because he
believes in love. Moreover, such idiots of happiness acquire wings and
new capacities, and even the door to art is opened to them.

If we cancel the suggestion of this intestinal fever from the lyric
of tones and words, what is left to poetry and music? ... L'art pour
l'art perhaps; the professional cant of frogs shivering outside in
the cold, and dying of despair in their swamp.... Everything else was
created by love.

All art works like a suggestion on the muscles and the senses which
were originally active in the ingenuous artistic man; its voice is only
heard by artists--it speaks to this kind of man, whose constitution
is attuned to such subtlety in sensitiveness. The concept "layman"
is a misnomer. The deaf man is not a subdivision of the class, whose
ears are sound. All art works as a tonic; it increases strength, it
kindles desire (i.e. the feeling of strength), it excites all the
more subtle recollections of intoxication; there is actually a special
kind of memory which underlies such states--a distant flitful world of
sensations here returns to being.

Ugliness is the contradiction of art. It is that which art excludes,
the negation of art: wherever decline, impoverishment of life,
impotence, decomposition, dissolution, are felt, however remotely, the
aesthetic man reacts with his No. Ugliness depresses: it is the sign
of depression. It robs strength, it impoverishes, it weighs down, ...
Ugliness suggests repulsive things. From one's states of health one
can test how an indisposition may increase one's power of fancying ugly
things. One's selection of things, interests, and questions becomes
different. Logic provides a state which is next of kin to ugliness:
heaviness, bluntness. In the presence of ugliness equilibrium is
lacking in a mechanical sense: ugliness limps and stumbles--the direct
opposite of the godly agility of the dancer.

The aesthetic state represents an overflow of means of communication
as well as a condition of extreme sensibility to stimuli and signs. It
is the zenith of communion and transmission between living creatures;
it is the source of languages. In it, languages, whether of signs,
sounds, or glances, have their birthplace. The richer phenomenon is
always the beginning: our abilities are subtilised forms of richer
abilities. But even to-day we still listen with our muscles, we even
read with our muscles.

Every mature art possesses a host of conventions as a basis: in so
far as it is a language. Convention is a condition of great art,
not an obstacle to it.... Every elevation of life likewise elevates
the power of communication, as also the understanding of man. The
power of living in other people's souls originally had nothing to do
with morality, but with a physiological irritability of suggestion:
"sympathy," or what is called "altruism," is merely a product of
that psycho-motor relationship which is reckoned as spirituality
(psycho-motor induction, says Charles Fere). People never communicate a
thought to one another: they communicate a movement, an imitative sign
which is then interpreted as a thought.

Compared with music, communication by means of words is a shameless
mode of procedure; words reduce and stultify; words make impersonal;
words make common that which is uncommon.

It is exceptional states that determine the artist--such states as are
all intimately related and entwined with morbid symptoms, so that it
would seem almost impossible to be an artist without being ill.

The physiological conditions which in the artist become moulded into a
"personality," and which, to a certain degree, may attach themselves to
any man:--

Intoxication, the feeling of enhanced power; the inner compulsion
to make things a mirror of one's own fulness and perfection.

The extreme sharpness of certain senses, so that they are capable
of understanding a totally different language of signs--and to create
such a language (this is a condition which manifests itself in some
nervous diseases); extreme susceptibility out of which great powers of
communion are developed; the desire to speak on the part of everything
that is capable of making-signs; a need of being rid of one's self by
means of gestures and attitudes; the ability of speaking about one's
self in a hundred different languages--in fact, a state of explosion.

One must first imagine this condition as one in which there is a
pressing and compulsory desire of ridding one's self of the ecstasy of
a state of tension, by all kinds of muscular work and movement; also as
an involuntary co-ordination of these movements with inner processes
(images, thoughts, desires)--as a kind of automatism of the whole
muscular system under the compulsion of strong stimuli acting from
within; the inability to resist reaction; the apparatus of resistance
is also suspended. Every inner movement (feeling, thought, emotion)
is accompanied by vascular changes, and consequently by changes in
colour, temperature, and secretion. The suggestive power of music, its
"suggestion mentale."

The compulsion to imitate: extreme irritability, by means of
which a certain example becomes contagious--a condition is guessed
and represented merely by means of a few signs.... A complete picture
is visualised by one's inner consciousness, and its effect soon shows
itself in the movement of the limbs,--in a certain suspension of the
will (Schopenhauer!!!!). A sort of blindness and deafness towards the
external world,--the realm of admitted stimuli is sharply defined.

This differentiates the artist from the layman (from the spectator
of art): the latter reaches the height of his excitement in the mere
act of apprehending: the former in giving--and in such a way that
the antagonism between these two gifts is not only natural but even
desirable. Each of these states has an opposite standpoint--to demand
of the artist that he should have the point of view of the spectator
(of the critic) is equivalent to asking him to impoverish his creative
power.... In this respect the same difference holds good as that which
exists between the sexes: one should not ask the artist who gives to
become a woman--to "receive."

Our aesthetics have hitherto been women's aesthetics, inasmuch as they
have only formulated the experiences of what is beautiful, from the
point of view of the receivers in art. In the whole of philosophy
hitherto the artist has been lacking ... i.e. as we have already
suggested, a necessary fault: for the artist who would begin to
understand himself would therewith begin to mistake himself--he must
not look backwards, he must not look at all; he must give.--It is an
honour for an artist to have no critical faculty; if he can criticise
he is mediocre, he is modern.

Here I lay down a series of psychological states as signs of
flourishing and complete life, which to-day we are in the habit of
regarding as morbid. But, by this time, we have broken ourselves of
the habit of speaking of healthy and morbid as opposites: the question
is one of degree, what I maintain on this point is that what people
call healthy nowadays represents a lower level of that which under
favourable circumstances actually would be healthy--that we are
relatively sick....

The artist belongs to a much stronger race. That which in us would be
harmful and sickly, is natural in him. But people object to this that
it is precisely the impoverishment of the machine which renders this
extraordinary power of comprehending every kind of suggestion possible:
e.g. our hysterical females.

An overflow of spunk and energy may quite as well lead to symptoms of
partial constraint, sense hallucinations, peripheral sensitiveness,
as a poor vitality does--the stimuli are differently determined, the
effect is the same.... What is not the same is above all the ultimate
result; the extreme torpidity of all morbid natures, after their
nervous eccentricities, has nothing in common with the states of the
artist, who need in no wise repent his best moments.... He is rich
enough for it all: he can squander without becoming poor.

Just as we now feel justified in judging genius as a form of neurosis,
we may perhaps think the same of artistic suggestive power,--and
our artists are, as a matter of fact, only too closely related to
hysterical females!!! This, however, is only an argument against the
present day, and not against artists in general.

The inartistic states are: objectivity, reflection suspension of the
will ... (Schopenhauer's scandalous misunderstanding consisted in
regarding art as a mere bridge to the denial of life)... The inartistic
states are: those which impoverish, which subtract, which bleach, under
which life suffers--the Christian.

The modern artist who, in his physiology, is next of kin to the
hysteric, may also be classified as a character belonging to this state
of morbidness. The hysteric is false,--he lies from the love of lying,
he is admirable in all the arts of dissimulation,--unless his morbid
vanity hood-wink him. This vanity is like a perpetual fever which is
in need of stupefying drugs, and which recoils from no self-deception
and no farce that promises it the most fleeting satisfaction. (The
incapacity for pride and the need of continual revenge for his
deep-rooted self-contempt, this is almost the definition of this man's
vanity.)

The absurd irritability of his system, which makes a crisis out of
every one of his experiences, and sees dramatic elements in the most
insignificant occurrences of life, deprives him of all calm reflection;
he ceases from being a personality, at most he is a rendezvous of
personalities of which first one and then the other asserts itself with
barefaced assurance. Precisely on this account he is great as an actor
i all these poor will-less people, whom doctors study so profoundly,
astound one through their virtuosity in mimicking, in transfiguration,
in their assumption of almost any character required.

Artists are not men of great passion, despite all their assertions
to the contrary both to themselves and to others. And for the
following two reasons: they lack all shyness towards themselves (they
watch themselves live, they spy upon themselves, they are much too
inquisitive), and they also lack shyness in the presence of passion
(as artists they exploit it). Secondly, however, that vampire, their
talent, generally forbids them such an expenditure of energy as passion
demands.--A man, who has a talent is sacrificed to that talent; he
lives under the vampirism of his talent.

A man does not get rid of his passion by reproducing it, but rather
he is rid of it if he is able to reproduce it. (Goethe teaches the
reverse, but it seems as though he deliberately misunderstood himself
here--from a sense of delicacy.)

Concerning a reasonable mode of life.--.Relative, chastity, a
fundamental and shrewd caution in regard to erotica, even in thought,
may be a reasonable mode of life even in richly equipped and perfect
natures. But this principle applies more particularly to artists; it
belongs to the best wisdom of their lives. Wholly trustworthy voices
have already been raised in favour of this view, e.g. Stendhal, Th.
Gautier, and Flaubert. The artist is perhaps in his way necessarily
a sensual man, generally susceptible, accessible to everything, and
capable of responding to the remotest stimulus or suggestion of a
stimulus. Nevertheless, as a rule he is in the power of his work, of
his will to mastership, really a sober and often even a chaste man. His
dominating instinct will have him so: it does not allow him to spend
himself haphazardly. It is one and the same form of strength which is
spent in artistic conception and in the sexual act: there is only one
form of strength. The artist who yields in this respect, and who spends
himself, is betrayed: by so doing he reveals his lack of instinct, his
lack of will in general. It may be a sign of decadence,--in any case it
reduces the value of his art to an incalculable degree.

Compared with the artist, the scientific man, regarded as a phenomenon,
is indeed a sign of a certain storing-up and levelling-down of
life (but also of an increase of strength, severity, hardness, and
will-power). To what extent can falsity and indifference towards truth
and utility be a sign of youth, of childishness, in the artist? ...
Their habitual manner, their unreasonableness, their ignorance of
themselves, their indifference to "eternal values," their seriousness
in play, their lack of dignity; clowns and gods in one; the saint and
the rabble.... Imitation as an imperious instinct.--Do not artists of
ascending life and artists of degeneration belong to all phases? ...
Yes!

Would any link be missing in the whole chain of science and art, if
woman, if woman's work, were excluded from it? Let us acknowledge the
exception--it proves the rule--that woman is capable of perfection in
everything which does not constitute a work: in letters, in memoirs,
in the most intricate handiwork--in short, in everything which is not
a craft; and just precisely because in the things mentioned woman
perfects herself, because in them she obeys the only artistic impulse
in her nature,--which is to captivate.... But what has woman to do
with the passionate indifference of the genuine artist who sees more
importance in a breath, in a sound, in the merest trifle, than in
himself?--who with all his five fingers gropes for his most secret
and hidden treasures?--who attributes no value to anything unless
it knows how to take shape (unless it surrenders itself, unless it
visualises itself in some way). Art as it is practised by artists--do
you not understand what it is? is it not an outrage on all our
pudeurs? ... Only in this century has woman dared to try her hand at
literature ("Vers la canaille plumiere ecrivassiere," to speak with
old Mirabeau): woman now writes, she now paints, she is losing her
instincts. And to what purpose, if one may put such a question?

A man is an artist to the extent to which he regards everything
that inartistic people call "form" as the actual substance, as the
"principal" thing. With such ideas a man certainly belongs to a world
upside down: for henceforward substance seems to him something merely
formal,--his own life included.

A sense for, and a delight in, nuances (which is characteristic of
modernity), in that which is not general, runs counter to the instinct
which finds its joy and its strength in grasping what is typical: like
Greek taste in its best period. In this there is an overcoming of the
plenitude of life; restraint dominates, the peace of the strong soul
which is slow to move and which feels a certain repugnance towards
excessive activity is defeated. The general rule, the law, is honoured
and made prominent, conversely, the exception is laid aside, and shades
are suppressed. All that which is firm, mighty, solid, life resting
on a broad and powerful basis, concealing its strength this pleases:
i.e. it corresponds with what we think of ourselves.

In the main I am much more in favour of artists than any philosopher
that has appeared hitherto: artists, at least, did not lose sight of
the great course which life pursues; they loved the things "of this
world,"--they loved their senses. To strive after "spirituality,"
in cases where this is not pure hypocrisy or self-deception, seems
to me to be either a misunderstanding, a disease, or a cure, I wish
myself, and all those who live without the troubles of a puritanical
conscience, and who are able to live in this way, an ever greater
spiritualisation and multiplication of the senses. Indeed, we would
fain be grateful to the senses for their subtlety, power, and
plenitude, and on that account offer them the best we have in the way
of spirit. What do we care about priestly and metaphysical anathemas
upon the senses? We no longer require to treat them in this way: it
is a sign of well-constitutedness when a man like Goethe clings with
ever greater joy and heartiness to the "things of this world"--in this
way he holds firmly to the grand concept of mankind, which is that man
becomes the glorifying power of existence when he learns to glorify
himself.

Pessimism in art?--The artist gradually learns to like for their own
sake, those means which bring about the condition of aesthetic elation;
extreme delicacy and glory of colour, definite delineation, quality of
tone; distinctness where in normal conditions distinctness is absent.
All distinct things, all nuances, in so far as they recall extreme
degrees of power which give rise to intoxication, kindle this feeling
of intoxication by association;--the effect of works of art is the
excitation of the state which creates art, of aesthetic intoxication.

The essential feature in art is its power of perfecting
existence, its production of perfection and plenitude; art is
essentially the affirmation, the blessing, and the deification of
existence.... What does a pessimistic art signify? Is it not a
contradictio?--Yes.--Schopenhauer is in error when he makes certain
works of art serve the purpose of pessimism. Tragedy does not teach
"resignation." ... To represent terrible and questionable things
is, in itself, the sign of an instinct of power and magnificence
in the artist; he doesn't fear them.... There is no such thing as
a pessimistic, art.... Art affirms. Job affirms. But Zola? and the
Goncourts?--the things they show us are ugly, their reason, however,
for showing them to us is their love of ugliness ... I don't care what
you say! You simply deceive yourselves if you think otherwise.--What a
relief Dostoievsky is!

If I have sufficiently initiated my readers into the doctrine that
even "goodness," in the whole comedy of existence, represents a form
of exhaustion, they will now credit Christianity with consistency for
having conceived the good to be the ugly. In this respect Christianity
was right.

It is absolutely unworthy of a philosopher to say that "the good and
the beautiful are one"; if he should add "and also the true," he
deserves to be thrashed. Truth is ugly.

Art is with us in order that we may not perish through truth.

Moralising tendencies may be combated with art. Art is freedom from
moral bigotry and philosophy a la Little Jack Horner: or it may be
the mockery of these things. The flight to Nature, where beauty and
terribleness are coupled. The concept of the great man.

--Fragile, useless souls-de-luxe, which are disconcerted by a mere
breath of wind, "beautiful souls."

--Ancient ideals, in their inexorable hardness and brutality, ought to
be awakened, as the mightiest of monsters that they are.

--We should feel a boisterous delight in the psychological perception
of how all moralised artists become worms and actors without knowing it.

--The falsity of art, its immorality, must be brought into the light of
day.

--The "fundamental idealising powers" (sensuality, intoxication,
excessive animality) should be brought to light.

Modern counterfeit practices in the arts: regarded as necessary--that
is to say, as fully in keeping with the needs most proper to the modern
soul.

The gaps in the gifts, and still more in the education, antecedents,
and schooling of modern artists, are now filled up in this way:--

First: A less artistic public is sought which is capable of unlimited
love (and is capable of falling on its knees before a personality).
The superstition of our century, the belief in "genius," assists this
process.

Secondly; Artists harangue the dark instincts of the dissatisfied,
the ambitious, and the self-deceivers of a democratic age: the
importance of poses.

Thirdly: The procedures of one art are transferred to the realm
of another; the object of art is confounded with that of science,
with that of the Church, or with that of the interests of the race
(nationalism), or with that of philosophy--a man rings all bells at
once, and awakens the vague suspicion that he is a god.

Fourthly: Artists flatter women, sufferers, and indignant folk.
Narcotics and opiates are made to preponderate in art. The fancy of
cultured people, and of the readers of poetry and ancient history, is
tickled.

We must distinguish between the "public" and the "select"; to satisfy
the public a man must be a charlatan to-day, to satisfy the select he
will be a virtuoso and nothing else. The geniuses peculiar to our
century overcame this distinction, they were great for both; the great
charlatanry of Victor Hugo and Richard Wagner was coupled with such
genuine virtuosity that it even satisfied the most refined artistic
connoisseurs. This is why greatness is lacking: these geniuses had a
double outlook; first, they catered for the coarsest needs, and then
for the most refined.

False "accentuation": (1) In romanticism, this unremitting
"expressivo" is not a sign of strength, but of a feeling of
deficiency;

Picturesque music, the so-called dramatic kind, is above all
easier (as is also the brutal scandalmongering and the juxtaposition of
facts and traits in realistic novels);

"Passion" as a matter of nerves and exhausted souls; likewise the
delight in high mountains, deserts, storms, orgies, and disgusting
details,--in bulkiness and massiveness (historians, for instance); as a
matter of fact, there is actually a cult of exaggerated feelings (how
is it that in stronger ages art desired just the opposite--a restraint
of passion?);

The preference for exciting materials (Erotica or Socialistica
or Pathologica): all these things are the signs of the style
of public that is being catered for to-day--that is to say, for
overworked, absentminded, or enfeebled people.

Such people must be tyrannised over in order to be affected.

Modern art is the art of tyrannising. A coarse and salient definiteness
in delineation; the motive simplified into a formula; formulae
tyrannise. Wild arabesques within the lines; overwhelming masses,
before which the senses are confused; brutality in coloration, in
subject-matter, in the desires. Examples: Zola, Wagner, and, in a more
spiritualised degree, Taine. Hence logic, massiveness, and brutality.

In regard to the painter: Tous ces modernes sont des poetes qui ont
voulu etre peintres, L'un a cherche des drames dans l'histoire,
l'autre des scenes de moeurs, celui ci traduit des religions, celui
la une philosophie. One imitates Raphael, another the early Italian
masters. The landscapists employ trees and clouds in order to make odes
and elegies. Not one is simply a painter; they are all archaeologists,
psychologists, and impresarios of one or another kind of event or
theory. They enjoy our erudition and our philosophy. Like us, they are
full, and too full, of general ideas. They like a form, not because it
is what it is, but because of what it expresses. They are the scions of
a learned, tormented, and reflecting generation, a thousand miles away
from the Old Masters who never read, and only concerned themselves with
feasting their eyes.

At bottom, even Wagner's music, in so far as it stands for the whole
of French romanticism, is literature: the charm of exoticism (strange
times, customs, passions), exercised upon sensitive cosy-corner people.
The delight of entering into extremely distant and prehistoric lands to
which books lead one, and by which means the whole horizon is painted
with new colours and new possibilities.... Dreams of still more distant
and unexploited worlds; disdain of the boulevards. ... For Nationalism,
let us not deceive ourselves, is also only a form of exoticism....
Romantic musicians merely relate what exotic books have made of them:
people would fain experience exotic sensations and passions according
to Florentine and Venetian taste; finally they are satisfied to look
for them in an image.... The essential factor is the kind of novel
desire, the desire to imitate, the desire to live as people have
lived once before in the past, and the disguise and dissimulation of
the soul.... Romantic art is only an emergency exit from defective
"reality."

The attempt to perform new things: revolution, Napoleon. Napoleon
represents the passion of new spiritual possibilities, of an extension
of the soul's domain.

The greater the debility of the will, the greater the extravagances in
the desire to feel, to represent, and to dream new things.--The result
of the excesses which have been indulged in: an insatiable thirst for
unrestrained feelings.... Foreign literatures afford the strongest
spices.

Winckelmann's and Goethe's Greeks, Victor Hugo's Orientals, Wagner's
Edda characters, Walter Scott's Englishmen of the thirteenth
century--some day the whole comedy will be exposed! All of it was
disproportionately historical and false, but--modern.

Concerning the characteristics of national genius in regard to the
strange and to the borrowed--

English genius vulgarises and makes realistic everything it sees;

The French whittles down, simplifies, rationalises, embellishes;

The German muddles, compromises, involves, and infects everything with
morality;

The Italian has made by far the freest and most subtle use of borrowed
material, and has enriched it with a hundred times more beauty than
it ever drew out of it: it is the richest genius, it had the most to
bestow.

The Jews, with Heinrich Heine and Offenbach, approached genius in
the sphere of art. The latter was the most intellectual and most
high-spirited satyr, who as a musician abided by great tradition,
and who, for him who has something more than ears, is a real relief
after the sentimental and, at bottom, degenerate musicians of German
romanticism.

Offenbach; trench music imbued with Voltaire's intellect, free,
wanton, with a slight sardonic grin, but clear and intellectual almost
to the point of banality (Offenbach never titivates), and free from the
mignardise of morbid or blond-Viennese sensuality.

If by artistic genius we understand the most consummate freedom
within the law, divine ease, and facility in overcoming the greatest
difficulties, then Offenbach has even more right to the title genius
than Wagner has. Wagner is heavy and clumsy: nothing is more foreign to
him than the moments of wanton perfection which this clown Offenbach
achieves as many as five times, six times, in nearly every one of his
buffooneries. But by genius we ought perhaps to understand something
else.

Concerning "music."--French, German, and Italian music. (Our most
debased periods in a political sense are our most productive. The
Slavs?)--The ballet, which is the outcome of excessive study of the
history of strange civilisations, has become master of opera.--Stage
music and musicians music.--It is an error to suppose that what Wagner
composed was a. form: it was rather formlessness. The possibilities
of dramatic construction have yet to be discovered.--Rhythm.
"Expression" at all costs. Harlotry in instrumentation.--All honour to
Heinrich Schutz; all honour to Mendelssohn: in them we find an element
of Goethe, but nowhere else! (We also find another element of Goethe
coming to blossom in Rahel; a third element in Heinrich Heine.)

Descriptive music leaves reality to work its effects alone.... All
these kinds of art are easier, and more easy to imitate; poorly gifted
people have recourse to them. The appeal to the instincts; suggestive
art.

Concerning our modern music.--The decay of melody, like the decay
of "ideas," and of the freedom of intellectual activity, is a piece
of clumsiness and obtuseness, which is developing itself into new
feats of daring and even into principles;--in the end man has only the
principles of his gifts, or of his lack of gifts.

"Dramatic music"--nonsense! It is simply bad music.... "Feeling" and
"passion" are merely substitutes when lofty intellectuality and the
joy of it (e.g. Voltaire's) can no longer be attained. Expressed
technically, feeling and "passion" are easier; they presuppose a much
poorer kind of artist. The recourse to drama betrays that an artist is
much more a master in tricky means than in genuine ones. To-day we have
both dramatic painting and dramatic poetry, etc.

What we lack in music is an aesthetic which would impose laws upon
musicians and give them a conscience; and as a result of this we lack
a real contest concerning "principles."--For as musicians we laugh
at Herbart's velleities in this department just as heartily as we
laugh at Schopenhauer's. As a matter of fact, tremendous difficulties
present themselves here. We no longer know on what basis to found our
concepts of what is exemplary, masterly, perfect. With the instincts
of old loves and old admiration we grope about in a realm of values,
and we almost believe, "that is good which pleases us".... I am always
suspicious when I hear people everywhere speak innocently of Beethoven
as a "classic"; what I would maintain, and with some seventy, is that,
in other arts, a classic is the very reverse of Beethoven. But when
the complete and glaring dissolution of style, Wagner's so-called
dramatic style, is taught and honoured as exemplary, as masterly, as
progressive, then my impatience exceeds all bounds. Dramatic style in
music, as Wagner understood it, is simply renunciation of all style
whatever; it is the assumption that something else, namely, drama, is a
hundred times more important than music. Wagner can paint; he does not
use music for the sake of music, with it he accentuates attitudes; he
is a poet. Finally he made an appeal to beautiful feelings and heaving
breasts, just as all other theatrical artists have done, and with it
all he converted women and even those whose souls thirst for culture
to him. But what do women and the uncultured care about music? All
these people have no conscience for art: none of them suffer when the
first and fundamental virtues of an art are scorned and trodden upon in
favour of that which is merely secondary (as ancilla dramaturgica).
What good can come of all extension in the means of expression, when
that which is expressed, art itself, has lost all its law and order?
The picturesque pomp and power of tones, the symbolism of sound,
rhythm, the colour effects of harmony and discord, the suggestive
significance of music, the whole sensuality of this art which Wagner
made prevail--it is all this that Wagner derived, developed, and drew
out of music. Victor Hugo did something very similar for language: but
already people in France are asking themselves, in regard to the case
of Victor Hugo, whether language was not corrupted by him, whether
reason, intellectuality, and thorough conformity to law in language
are not suppressed when the sensuality of expression is elevated to a
high place? Is it not a sign of decadence that the poets in France have
become plastic artists, and that the musicians of Germany have become
actors and culturemongers?

To-day there exists a sort of musical pessimism even among people
who are not musicians. Who has not met and cursed the confounded
youthlet who torments his piano until it shrieks with despair,
and who single-handed heaves the slime of the most lugubrious and
drabby harmonies before him? By so doing a man betrays himself as a
pessimist.... It is open to question, though, whether he also proves
himself a musician by this means. I for my part could never be made
to believe it. Wagnerite pur sang is unmusical, he submits to the
elementary forces of music very much as a woman submits to the will
of the man who hypnotises her--and in order to be able to do this he
must not be made suspicious in rebus musicis et musicantibus by a
too severe or too delicate conscience. I said "very much as"--but in
this respect I spoke perhaps more than a parable. Let any one consider
the means which Wagner uses by preference, when he wishes to make an
effect (means which for the greater part he first had to invent), they
are appallingly similar to the means by which a hypnotist exercises
his power (the choice of his movements, the general colour of his
orchestration; the excruciating evasion of consistency, and fairness
and squareness, in rhythm; the creepiness, the soothing touch, the
mystery, the hysteria of his "unending melody"). And is the condition
to which the overture to Lohengrin, for instance, reduces the men,
and still more the women, in the audience, so essentially different
from the somnambulistic trance? On one occasion after the overture in
question had been played, I heard an Italian lady say, with her eyes
half closed, in a way in which female Wagnerites are adepts: "Come si
dorme con questa musica!"[10]

[Footnote 10: "How the music makes one sleep!"--Tr.]

Religion in music.--What a large amount of satisfaction all religious
needs get out of Wagnerian music, though this is never acknowledged
or even understood! How much prayer, virtue, unction, virginity,
salvation, speaks through this music!... Oh what capital this cunning
saint, who leads and seduces us back to everything that was once
believed in, makes out of the fact that he may dispense with words
and concepts! ... Our intellectual conscience has no need to feel
ashamed--it stands apart--if any old instinct puts its trembling lips
to the rim of forbidden philtres.... This is shrewd and healthy, and,
in so far as it betrays a certain shame in regard to the satisfaction
of the religious instinct, it is even a good sign.... Cunning
Christianity: the type of the music which came from the "last Wagner."

I distinguish between courage before persons, courage before things,
and courage on paper. The latter was the courage of David Strauss, for
instance. I distinguish again between the courage before witnesses
and the courage without witnesses: the courage of a Christian, or
of believers in God in general, can never be the courage without
witnesses--but on this score alone Christian courage stands condemned.
Finally, I distinguish between the courage which is temperamental and
the courage which is the fear of fear; a single instance of the latter
kind is moral courage. To this list the courage of despair should be
added.

This is the courage which Wagner possessed. His attitude in regard to
music was at bottom a desperate one. He lacked two things which go
to make up a good musician: nature and nurture, the predisposition
for music and the discipline and schooling which music requires. He
had courage: out of this deficiency he established a principle; he
invented a kind of music for himself. The dramatic music which he
invented was the music which he was able to compose,--its limitations
are Wagner's limitations.

And he was misunderstood!--Was he really misunderstood?... Such is
the case with five-sixths of the artists of to-day. Wagner is their
Saviour: five-sixths, moreover, is the "lowest proportion." In any case
where Nature has shown herself without reserve, and wherever culture is
an accident, a mere attempt, a piece of dilettantism, the artist turns
instinctively--what do I say?--I mean enthusiastically, to Wagner; as
the poet says: "Half drew he him, and half sank he."[11]

[Footnote 11: This is an adapted quotation from Goethe's poem, "The
Fisherman." The translation is E. A. Bowring's.--Tr.]

"Music" and the grand style. The greatness of an artist is not to be
measured by the beautiful feelings which he evokes: let this belief
be left to the girls. It should be measured according to the extent
to which he approaches the grand style, according to the extent to
which he is capable of the grand style. This style and great passion
have this in common--that they scorn to please; that they forget to
persuade; that they command: that they will.... To become master of
the chaos which is in one; to compel one's inner chaos to assume form;
to become consistent, simple, unequivocal, mathematical, law this is
the great ambition here. By means of it one repels; nothing so much
endears people to such powerful men as this,--a desert seems to lie
around them, they impose silence upon all, and awe every one with the
greatness Of their sacrilege.... All arts know this kind of aspirant to
the grand style: why are they absent in music? Never yet has a musician
built as that architect did who erected the Palazzo Pitti.... This is a
problem. Does music perhaps belong to that culture in which the reign
of powerful men of various types is already at an end? Is the concept
"grand style" in fact a contradiction of the soul of music,--of "the
Woman" in our music? ...

With this I touch upon the cardinal question: how should all our music
be classified? The age of classical taste knows nothing that can be
compared with it: it bloomed when the world of the Renaissance reached
its evening, when "freedom" had already bidden farewell to both men and
their customs--is it characteristic of music to be Counter-Renaissance?
Is music, perchance, the sister of the baroque style, seeing that in
any case they were contemporaries? Is not music, modern music, already
decadence? ...

I have put my finger before on this question: whether music is not an
example of Counter-Renaissance art? whether it is not the next of kin
to the baroque style? whether it has not grown in Opposition to all
classic taste, so that any aspiration to classicism is forbidden by the
very nature of music?

The answer to this most important of all questions of values would
not be a very doubtful one, if people thoroughly understood the
fact that music attains to its highest maturity and plenitude as
romanticism--likewise as a reactionary movement against classicism.

Mozart, a delicate and lovable soul, but quite eighteenth century,
even in his serious lapses ... Beethoven, the first great romanticist
according to the French conception of romanticism, just as Wagner is
the last great romanticist ... both of them are instinctive opponents
of classical taste, of severe style--not to speak of "grand" in this
regard.

Romanticism: an ambiguous question, like all modern questions.

The aesthetic conditions are twofold:--

The abundant and generous, as opposed to the seeking and the desiring.

A romanticist is an artist whose great dissatisfaction with himself
makes him productive--; who looks away from himself and his fellows,
and sometimes, therefore, looks backwards.

Is art the result of dissatisfaction with reality? or is it the
expression of gratitude for happiness experienced? In the first case,
it is romanticism; in the second, it is glorification and dithyramb
(in short, apotheosis art): even Raphael belongs to this, except for
the fact that he was guilty of the duplicity of having defied the
appearance of the Christian view of the world. He was thankful for life
precisely where it was not exactly Christian.

With a moral interpretation the world is insufferable; Christianity was
the attempt to overcome the world with morality: i.e. to deny it.
In praxi such a mad experiment--an imbecile elevation of man above
the world--could only end in the beglooming, the dwarfing, and the
impoverishment of mankind: the only kind of man who gained anything by
it, who was promoted by it, was the most mediocre, the most harmless
and gregarious type.

Homer as an apotheosis artist; Rubens also. Music has not yet had such
an artist.

The idealisation of the great criminal (the feeling for his greatness)
is Greek; the depreciation, the slander, the contempt of the sinner, is
Judaeo-Christian.

Romanticism and its opposite. In regard to all aesthetic values I now
avail myself of this fundamental distinction: in every individual
case I ask myself has hunger or has superabundance been creative
here? At first another distinction might perhaps seem preferable, it
is far more obvious,--e.g. the distinction which decides whether a
desire for stability, for eternity, for Being, or whether a desire for
destruction, for change, for Becoming, has been the cause of creation.
But both kinds of desire, when examined more closely, prove to be
ambiguous, and really susceptible of interpretation only according to
that scheme already mentioned and which I think is rightly preferred.

The desire for destruction, for change, for Becoming, may be the
expression of an overflowing power pregnant with promises for the
future (my term for this, as is well known, is Dionysian); it may,
however, also be the hate of the ill-constituted, of the needy and of
the physiologically botched, that destroys, and must destroy, because
such creatures are indignant at, and annoyed by everything lasting and
stable.

The act of immortalising can, on the other hand, be the outcome
of gratitude and love: an art which has this origin is always an
apotheosis art; dithyrambic, as perhaps with Rubens, happy, as perhaps
with Hafiz; bright and gracious, and shedding a ray of glory over all
things, as in Goethe. But it may also, however, be the outcome of the
tyrannical will of the great sufferer who would make the most personal,
individual, and narrow trait about him, the actual idiosyncrasy of his
pain--in fact, into a binding law and imposition, and who thus wreaks
his revenge upon all things by stamping, branding, and violating them
with the image of his torment. The latter case is romantic pessimism
in its highest form, whether this be Schopenhauerian voluntarism or
Wagnerian music.

It is a question whether the antithesis, classic and romantic, does not
conceal that other antithesis, the active and the reactive.

In order to be a classic, one must be possessed of all the strong and
apparently contradictory gifts and passions: but in such a way that
they run in harness together, and culminate simultaneously in elevating
a certain species of literature or art or politics to its height and
zenith (they must not do this after that elevation has taken place
...). They must reflect the complete state (either of a people or of
a culture), and express its most profound and most secret nature,
at a time when it is still stable and not yet discoloured by the
imitation of foreign things (or when it is still dependent ...); not
a reactive but a deliberate and progressive spirit, saying Yea in all
circumstances, even in its hate.

"And does not the highest personal value belong thereto?" It is worth
considering whether moral prejudices do not perhaps exercise their
influence here, and whether great moral loftiness is not perhaps a
contradiction of the classical? ... Whether the moral monsters must
not necessarily be romantic in word and deed? Any such preponderance
of one virtue over others (as in the case of the moral monster) is
precisely what with most hostility counteracts the classical power in
equilibrium, supposing a people manifested this moral loftiness and
were classical notwithstanding, we should have to conclude boldly that
they were also on the same high level in immorality! this was perhaps
the case with Shakespeare (provided that he was really Lord Bacon).

Concerning the future. Against the romanticism of great passion.--We
must understand how a certain modicum of coldness, lucidity,
and hardness is inseparable from all classical taste: above all
consistency, happy intellectuality, "the three unities," concentration,
hatred of all feeling, of all sentimentality, of all esprit,
hatred of all multiformity, of all uncertainty, evasiveness, and of
all nebulosity, as also of all brevity, finicking, prettiness and
good nature. Artistic formulae must not be played with: life must be
remodelled so that it should be forced to formulate itself accordingly.

It is really an exhilarating spectacle which we have only learned
to laugh at quite recently, because we have only seen through it
quite recently: this spectacle of Herder's, Winckelmann's, Goethe's,
and Hegel's contemporaries claiming that they had rediscovered the
classical ideal ... and at the same time, Shakespeare! And this same
crew of men had scurvily repudiated all relationship with the classical
school of France! As if the essential principle could not have been
learnt as well here as elsewhere! ... But what people wanted was
"nature," and "naturalness": Oh, the stupidity of it! It was thought
that classicism was a kind of naturalness!

Without either prejudice or indulgence we should try and investigate
upon what soil a classical taste can be evolved. The hardening,
the simplification, the strengthening, and the bedevilling of man
are inseparable from classical taste. Logical and psychological
simplification. A contempt of detail, of complexity, of obscurity.

The romanticists of Germany do not protest against classicism, but
against reason, against illumination, against taste, against the
eighteenth century.

The essence of romantico-Wagnerian music is the opposite of the
classical spirit.

The will to unity (because unity tyrannises. e.g. the listener and
the spectator), but the artist's inability to tyrannise over himself
where it is most needed--that is to say, in regard to the work itself
(in regard to knowing what to leave out, what to shorten, what to
clarify, what to simplify). The overwhelming by means of masses
(Wagner, Victor Hugo, Zola, Taine).

The Nihilism of artists.--Nature is cruel in her cheerfulness;
cynical in her sunrises. We are hostile to emotions. We flee thither
where Nature moves our senses and our imagination, where we have
nothing to love, where we are not reminded of the moral semblances and
delicacies of this northern nature; and the same applies to the arts.
We prefer that which no longer reminds us of good and evil. Our moral
sensibility and tenderness seem to be relieved in the heart of terrible
and happy Nature, in the fatalism of the senses and forces. Life
without goodness.

Great well-being arises from contemplating Nature's indifference to
good and evil.

No justice in history, no goodness in Nature. That is why the
pessimist when he is an artist prefers those historical subjects where
the absence of justice reveals itself with magnificent simplicity,
where perfection actually comes to expression--and likewise he prefers
that in Nature, where her callous evil character is not hypocritically
concealed, where that character is seen in perfection.... The
Nihilistic artist betrays himself in willing and preferring cynical
history and cynical Nature.

What is tragic?--Again and again I have pointed to the great
misunderstanding of Aristotle in maintaining that the tragic emotions
were the two depressing emotions--fear and pity. Had he been right,
tragedy would be an art unfriendly to life: it would have been
necessary to caution people against it as against something generally
harmful and suspicious. Art, otherwise the great stimulus of life, the
great intoxicant of life, the great will to life, here became a tool of
decadence, the hand-maiden of pessimism and ill-health (for to suppose,
as Aristotle supposed, that by exciting these emotions we thereby
purged people of them, is simply an error). Something which habitually
excites fear or pity, disorganises, weakens, and discourages: and
supposing Schopenhauer were right in thinking that tragedy taught
resignation (i.e. a meek renunciation of happiness, hope, and of
the will to live), this would presuppose an art in which art itself
was denied. Tragedy would then constitute a process of dissolution;
the instinct of life would destroy itself in the instinct of art.
Christianity, Nihilism, tragic art, physiological decadence; these
things would then be linked, they would then preponderate together
and assist each other onwards--downwards.... Tragedy would thus be a
symptom of decline.

This theory may be refuted in the most cold-blooded way, namely, by
measuring the effect of a tragic emotion by means of a dynamometer
The result would be a fact which only the bottomless falsity of
a doctrinaire could misunderstand: that tragedy is a tonic. If
Schopenhauer refuses to see the truth here, if he regards general
depression as a tragic condition, if he would have informed the Greeks
(who to his disgust were not "resigned") that they did not firmly
possess the highest principles of life: it is only owing to his parti
pris, to the need of consistency in his system, to the dishonesty of
the doctrinaire--that dreadful dishonesty which step for step corrupted
the whole psychology of Schopenhauer (he who had arbitrarily and almost
violently misunderstood genius, art itself, morality, pagan religion,
beauty, knowledge, and almost everything).

The tragic artist.--Whether, and in regard to what, the judgment
"beautiful" is established is a question of an individual's or of a
people's strength The feeling of plenitude, of overflowing strength
(which gaily and courageously meets many an obstacle before which
the weakling shudders)--the feeling of power utters the judgment
"beautiful" concerning things and conditions which the instinct of
impotence can only value as hateful and ugly. The flair which
enables us to decide whether the objects we encounter are dangerous,
problematic, or alluring, likewise determines our aesthetic Yea. ("This
is beautiful," is an affirmation).

From this we see that, generally speaking, a preference for
questionable and terrible things is a symptom of strength; whereas the
taste for pretty and charming trifles is characteristic of the weak
and the delicate. The love of tragedy is typical of strong ages and
characters: its non plus ultra is perhaps the Divina Commedia. It
is the heroic spirits which in tragic cruelty say Yea unto themselves:
they are hard enough to feel pain as a pleasure.

On the other hand, supposing weaklings desire to get pleasure from
an art which was not designed for them, what interpretation must we
suppose they would like to give tragedy in order to make it suit their
taste? They would interpret their own feeling of value into it: e.g.
the "triumph of the moral order of things," or the teaching of the
"uselessness of existence," or the incitement to "resignation" (or also
half-medicinal and half-moral outpourings, a la Aristotle). Finally,
the art of terrible natures, in so far as it may excite the nerves,
may be regarded by the weak and exhausted as a stimulus: this is now
taking place, for instance, in the case of the admiration meted out to
Wagner's art. A test of man's well-being and consciousness of power is
the extent to which he can acknowledge the terrible and questionable
character of things, and whether he is in any need of a faith at the
end.

This kind of artistic pessimism is precisely the reverse of that
religio-moral pessimism which suffers from the corruption of man
and the enigmatic character of existence: the latter insists upon
deliverance, or at least upon the hope of deliverance. Those
who suffer, doubt, and distrust themselves,--the sick, in other
words,--have in all ages required the transporting influence of visions
in order to be able to exist at all (the notion "blessedness" arose in
this way). A similar case would be that of the artists of decadence,
who at bottom maintain a Nihilistic attitude to life, and take
refuge in the beauty of form,--in those select cases in which Nature
is perfect, in which she is indifferently great and indifferently
beautiful. (The "love of the beautiful" may thus be something very
different from the ability to see or create the beautiful: it may be
the expression of impotence in this respect.) The most convincing
artists are those who make harmony ring out of every discord, and
who benefit all things by the gift of their power and inner harmony:
in every work of art they merely reveal the symbol of their inmost
experiences--their creation is gratitude for life.

The depth of the tragic artist consists in the fact that his aesthetic
instinct surveys the more remote results, that he does not halt
shortsightedly at the thing that is nearest, that he says Yea to the
whole cosmic economy, which justifies the terrible, the evil, and the
questionable; which more than justifies it.

Art in the "Birth of Tragedy."

The conception of the work which lies right in the background of this
book, is extraordinarily gloomy and unpleasant: among all the types
of pessimism which have ever been known hitherto, none seems to have
attained to this degree of malice. The contrast of a true and of an
apparent world is entirely absent here: there is but one world, and it
is false, cruel, contradictory, seductive, and without sense. A world,
thus constituted is the true world. We are in need of lies in order to
rise superior to this reality, to this truth--that is to say, in order
to live.... That lies should be necessary to life is part and parcel of
the terrible and questionable character of existence.

Metaphysics, morality, religion, science, in this book, all these
things are regarded merely as different forms of falsehood: by means of
them we are led to believe in life. "Life, must inspire confidence";
the task which this imposes upon us is enormous. In order to solve,
this problem man must already be a liar in his heart, but he must above
all else be an artist. And he is that. Metaphysics, religion, morality,
science, all these things are but the offshoot of his will to art,
to falsehood, to a flight from "truth," to a denial of "truth." This
ability, this artistic capacity par excellence of man--thanks to
which he overcomes reality with lies,--is a quality which he has in
common with all other forms of existence. He himself is indeed a piece
of reality, of truth, of nature: how could he help being also a piece
of genius in prevarication!

The fact that the character of existence is misunderstood, is the
profoundest and the highest secret motive behind everything relating
to virtue, science, piety, and art. To be blind to many things, to
see many things falsely, to fancy many things: Oh, how clever man has
been in those circumstances in which he believed he was anything but
clever! Love, enthusiasm, "God"--are but subtle forms of ultimate
Self-deception; they are but seductions to life and to the belief in
life! In those moments when man was deceived, when he had befooled
himself and when he believed in life: Oh, how his spirit swelled within
him! Oh, what ecstasies he had! What power he felt! And what artistic
triumphs in the feeling of power! ... Man had once more become master
of "matter,"--master of truth! ... And whenever man rejoices it is
always in the same way: he rejoices as an artist, his power is his joy,
he enjoys falsehood as his power....

II.

Art and nothing else! Art is the great means of making life possible,
the great seducer to life, the great stimulus of life.

Art is the only superior counter-agent to all will to the denial of
life; it is par excellence the anti-Christian, the anti-Buddhistic,
the anti-Nihilistic force.

Art is the alleviation of the seeker after knowledge,--of him who
recognises the terrible and questionable character Of existence, and
who will recognise it,--of the tragic seeker after knowledge.

Art is the alleviation of the man of action,--of him who not only sees
the terrible and questionable character of existence, but also lives
it, will live it,--of the tragic and warlike man, the hero. Art is the
alleviation of the sufferer,--as the way to states in which pain is
willed, is transfigured, is deified, where suffering is a form of great
ecstasy.

III.

It is clear that in this book pessimism, or, better still, Nihilism,
stands for "truth." But truth is not postulated as the highest measure
of value, and still less as the highest power. The will to appearance,
to illusion, to deception, to becoming, and to change (to objective
deception), is here regarded as more profound, as more primeval, as
more metaphysical than the will to truth, to reality, to appearance:
the latter is merely a form of the will to illusion. Happiness is
likewise conceived as more primeval than pain: and pain is considered
as conditioned, as a consequence Of the will to happiness (of the will
to Becoming, to growth, to forming, i.e. to creating; in creating,
however, destruction is included). The highest state of Yea-saying to
existence is conceived as one from which the greatest pain may not be
excluded: the tragico-Dionysian state.

IV.

In this way this book is even anti-pessimistic, namely, in the sense
that it teaches something which is stronger than pessimism and which
is more "divine" than truth: Art. Nobody, it would seem, would be more
ready seriously to utter a radical denial of life, an actual denial
of action even more than a denial of life, than the author of this
book. Except that he knows--for he has experienced it, and perhaps
experienced little else!--that art is of more value than truth.

Even in the preface, in which Richard Wagner is, as it were, invited
to join with him in conversation, the author expresses this article of
faith, this gospel for artists; "Art is the only task of life, art is
the metaphysical activity of life...."

FOURTH BOOK

DISCIPLINE AND BREEDING.

THE ORDER OF RANK.

The Doctrine of the Order of Rank.

In this age of universal suffrage, in which everybody is allowed to
sit in judgment upon everything and everybody, I feel compelled to
re-establish the order of rank.

Quanta of power alone determine rank and distinguish rank: nothing else
does.

The will to power.--How must those men be constituted who would
undertake this transvaluation? The order of rank as the order of power:
war and danger are the prerequisites which allow of a rank maintaining
its conditions. The prodigious example: man in Nature--the weakest and
shrewdest creature making himself master, and putting a yoke upon all
less intelligent forces.

I distinguish between the type which represents ascending life and
that which represents decay, decomposition and weakness. Ought one to
suppose that the question of rank between these two types can be at all
doubtful?

The modicum of power which you represent decides your rank; all the
rest is cowardice.

The advantages of standing detached from one's age.--Detached from
the two movements, that of individualism and that of collectivist
morality; for even the first does not recognise the order of rank, and
would give one individual the same freedom as another. My thoughts are
not concerned with the degree of freedom which should be granted to
the one or to the other or to all, but with the degree of power which
the one or the other should exercise over his neighbour or over all;
and more especially with the question to what extent a sacrifice of
freedom, or even enslavement, may afford the basis for the cultivation,
of a superior type. In plain words: how could one sacrifice the
development of mankind in order to assist a higher species than man to
come into being.

Concerning rank.--The terrible consequences of "equality"--in the end
everybody thinks he has the right to every problem. All order of rank
has vanished.

It is necessary for higher men to declare war upon the masses! In
all directions mediocre people are joining hands in order to make
themselves masters. Everything that pampers, that softens, and that
brings the "people" or "woman" to the front, operates in favour of
universal suffrage,--that is to say, the dominion of inferior men.
But we must make reprisals, and draw the whole state of affairs (which
commenced in Europe with Christianity) to the light of day and to
judgment.

A teaching is needed which is strong enough to work in a disciplinary
manner; it should operate in such a way as to strengthen the strong and
to paralyse and smash up the world-weary.

The annihilation of declining races. The decay of Europe. The
annihilation of slave-tainted valuations. The dominion of the world
as a means to the rearing of a higher type. The annihilation of the
humbug which is called morality (Christianity as a hysterical kind
of honesty in this regard: Augustine, Bunyan.) The annihilation of
universal suffrage--that is to say, that system by means of which the
lowest natures prescribe themselves as a law for higher natures. The
annihilation of mediocrity and its prevalence. (The one-sided, the
individuals--peoples; constitutional plenitude should be aimed at by
means of the coupling of opposites; to this end race-combinations
should be tried.) The new kind of courage--no a priori truths (those
who were accustomed to believe in something sought such truths!),
but free submission to a ruling thought, which has its time; for
instance, time conceived as the quality of space, etc.

The Strong and the Weak.

The notion, "strong and weak man" resolves itself into this, that in
the first place much strength is inherited--the man is a total sum; in
the other, not yet enough (inadequate inheritance, subdivision of the
inherited qualities). Weakness may be a starting phenomenon: not yet
enough; or a final phenomenon: "no more."

The determining point is there where great strength is present, or
where a great amount of strength can be discharged. The mass, as the
sum-total of the weak, reacts slowly; it defends itself against
much for which it is too weak,--against that for which it has no
use; it never creates, it never takes a step forward. This is
opposed to the theory which denies the strong individual and would
maintain that the "masses do everything." The difference is similar
to that which obtains between separated generations: four or even
five generations may lie between the masses and him who is the moving
spirit--it is a chronological difference.

The values of the weak are in the van, because the strong have
adopted them in order to lead with them.

Why the weak triumph.--On the whole, the sick and the weak have
more sympathy and are more "humane"; the sick and the weak have
more intellect, and are more changeable more variegated, more
entertaining--more malicious; the sick alone invented malice. (A
morbid precocity is often to be observed among rickety, scrofulitic,
and tuberculous people.) Esprit: the property of older races; Jews,
Frenchmen, Chinese. (The anti-Semites do not forgive the Jews for
having both intellect--and money. Anti-Semites--another name for
"bungled and botched.")

The sick and the weak have always had fascination on their side; they
are more interesting than the healthy: the fool and the saint--the
two most interesting kinds of men.... Closely related thereto is the
"genius." The "great adventurers and criminals" and all great men,
the most healthy in particular, have always been sick at certain
periods of their lives--great disturbances of the emotions, the
passion for power, love, revenge, are all accompanied by very profound
perturbations. And, as for decadence, every man who does not die
prematurely manifests it in almost every respect--he therefore knows
from experience the instincts which belong to it: for half his life
nearly every man is decadent.

And finally, woman! One-half of mankind is weak, chronically sick,
changeable, shifty woman requires strength in order to cleave to it;
she also requires a religion of the weak which glorifies weakness,
love, and modesty as divine: or, better still, she makes the strong
weak--she rules when she succeeds in overcoming the strong. Woman
has always conspired with decadent types,--the priests, for instance,
against the mighty, against the "strong," against men. Women avail
themselves of children for the cult of piety, pity, and love:--the
mother stands as the symbol of convincing altruism.

Finally, the increase of civilisation with its necessary correlatives,
the increase of morbid elements, of the neurotic and psychiatric
and of the criminal. A sort of intermediary species arises,
the artist. He is distinct from those who are criminals as the
result of weak wills and of the fear of society, although they may
not yet be ripe for the asylum; but he has antennas which grope
inquisitively into both spheres, this specific plant of culture,
the modern artist, painter, musician, and, above all, novelist, who
designates his particular kind of attitude with the very indefinite
word "naturalism."... Lunatics, criminals, and realists[1] are on
the increase: this is the sign of a growing culture plunging forward
at headlong speed--that is to say, its excrement, its refuse, the
rubbish that is shot from it every day, is beginning to acquire more
importance, the retrogressive movement keeps pace with the advance.

Finally, the social mishmash, which is the result of revolution,
of the establishment of equal rights, and of the superstition, the
"equality of men." Thus the possessors of the instincts of decline
(of resentment, of discontent, of the lust of destruction, of anarchy
and Nihilism), as also the instincts of slavery, of cowardice, of
craftiness, and of rascality, which are inherent among those classes
of society which have long been suppressed, are beginning to get
infused into the blood of all ranks. Two or three generations later,
the race can no longer be recognised--everything has become mob. And
thus there results a collective instinct against selection, against
every kind of privilege, and this instinct operates with such power,
certainty, hardness, and cruelty that, as a matter of fact, in the end,
even the privileged classes have to submit: all those who still wish to
hold on to power flatter the mob, work with the mob, and must have the
mob on their side--the "geniuses" above all. The latter become the
heralds of those feelings with which the mob can be inspired,--the
expression of pity, of honour, even for all that suffers, all that is
low and despised, and has lived under persecution, becomes predominant
(types: Victor Hugo, Richard Wagner).--The rise of the mob signifies
once more the rise of old values.

In the case of such an extreme movement, both in tempo and in means,
as characterises our civilisation, man's ballast is shifted. Those
men whose worth is greatest, and whose mission, as it were, is to
compensate for the very great danger of such a morbid movement,--such
men become dawdlers par excellence; they are slow to accept anything,
and are tenacious; they are creatures that are relatively lasting
in the midst of this vast mingling and changing of elements. In
such circumstances power is necessarily relegated to the mediocre:
mediocrity, as the trustee and bearer of the future, consolidates
itself against the rule of the mob and of eccentricities (both of
which are, in most cases, united). In this way a new antagonist is
evolved for exceptional men--or in certain cases a new temptation.
Provided that they do not adapt themselves to the mob, and stand up
for what satisfies the instincts of the disinherited, they will find
it necessary to be "mediocre" and sound. They know: mediocritas
is also aurea,--it alone has command of money and gold (of all
that glitters ...).... And, once more, old virtue and the whole
superannuated world of ideals in general secures a gifted host of
special-pleaders.... Result: mediocrity acquires intellect, wit, and
genius, it becomes entertaining, and even seductive.

Result.--A high culture can only stand upon a broad basis, upon a
strongly and soundly consolidated mediocrity. In its service and
assisted by it, science and even art do their work. Science could
not wish for a better state of affairs: in its essence it belongs to a
middle-class type of man,--among exceptions it is out of place,--there
is not anything aristocratic and still less anything anarchic in its
instincts.--The power of the middle classes is then upheld by means of
commerce, but, above all, by means of money-dealing: the instinct of
great financiers is opposed to everything extreme--on this account
the Jews are, for the present, the most conservative power in the
threatening and insecure conditions of modern Europe. They can have
no use either for revolutions, for socialism, or for militarism: if
they would have power, and if they should need it, even over the
revolutionary party, this is only the result of what I have already
said, and it in no way contradicts it. Against other extreme movements
they may occasionally require to excite terror by showing how much
power is in their hands. But their instinct itself is inveterately
conservative and "mediocre, ... Wherever power exists, they know how to
become mighty; but the application of their power always takes the same
direction. The polite term for mediocre, as is well known, is the
word "Liberal."

Reflection.--It is all nonsense to suppose that this general
conquest of values is anti-biological. In order to explain it, we
ought to try and show that it is the result of a certain interest of
life to maintain the type "man," even by means of this method which
leads to the prevalence of the weak and the physiologically botched--if
things were otherwise, might man not cease to exist? Problem ...

The enhancement of the type may prove fatal to the maintenance of
the species. Why?--The experience of history shows that strong races
decimate each other mutually, by means of war, lust for power, and
venturousness; the strong emotions; wastefulness (strength is no longer
capitalised, disturbed mental systems arise from excessive tension);
their existence is a costly affair in short, they persistently give
rise to friction between themselves; periods of profound slackness
and torpidity intervene: all great ages have to be paid for.... The
strong are, after all, weaker, less wilful, and more absurd than the
average weak ones.

They are squandering races. "Permanence," in itself, can have no
value: that which ought to be preferred thereto would be a shorter life
for the species, but a life richer in creations. It would remain
to be proved that, even as things are, a richer sum of creations is
attained than in the case of the shorter existence; i.e. that man, as
a storehouse of power, attains to a much higher degree of dominion over
things under the conditions which have existed hitherto.... We are here
face to face with a problem of economics.

[Footnote 1: The German word is "Naturalist," and really means
"realist" in a bad sense.--Tr.]

The state of mind which calls itself "idealism," and which will neither
allow mediocrity to be mediocre nor woman to be woman! Do not make
everything uniform! We should have a clear idea of how dearly we have
to pay for the establishment of a virtue; and that virtue is nothing
generally desirable, but a noble piece of madness, a beautiful
exception, which gives us the privilege of feeling elated....

It is necessary to show that a counter-movement is inevitably
associated with any increasingly economical consumption of men
and mankind, and with an ever more closely involved "machinery" of
interests and services. I call this counter-movement the separation
of the luxurious surplus of mankind: by means of it a stronger kind,
a higher type, must come to light, which has other conditions for its
origin and for its maintenance than the average man. My concept, my
metaphor for this type is, as you know, the word "Superman." Along the
first road, which can now be completely surveyed, arose adaptation,
stultification, higher Chinese culture, modesty in the Instincts,
and satisfaction at the sight of the belittlement of man--a kind of
stationary level of mankind. If ever we get that inevitable and
imminent, general control of the economy of the earth, then mankind
can be used as machinery and find its best purpose in the service of
this economy--as an enormous piece of clock-work consisting of ever
smaller and ever more subtly adapted wheels; then all the dominating
and commanding elements will become ever more superfluous; and the
whole gains enormous energy, while the individual factors which compose
it represent but small modicums of strength and of value. To oppose
this dwarfing and adaptation of man to a specialised kind of utility, a
reverse movement is needed -the procreation of the synthetic man who
embodies everything and justifies it; that man for whom the turning
of mankind into a machine is a first condition of existence, for whom
the rest of mankind is but soil on which he can devise his higher
mode of existence.

He is in need of the opposition of the masses, of those who are
"levelled down"; he requires that feeling of distance from them; he
stands upon them, he lives on them. This higher form of aristocracy
is the form of the future. From the moral point of view, the collective
machinery above described, that solidarity of all wheels, represents
the most extreme example in the exploitation of mankind: but it
presupposes the existence of those for whom such an exploitation would
have some meaning.[2] Otherwise it would signify, as a matter of
fact, merely the general depreciation of the type man,--a retrograde
phenomenon on a grand scale.

Readers are beginning to see what I am combating--namely, economic
optimism: as if the genera] welfare of everybody must necessarily
increase with the growing self-sacrifice of everybody. The very reverse
seems to me to be the case, the self-sacrifice of everybody amounts
to a collective loss; man becomes inferior--so that nobody knows
what end this monstrous purpose has served. A wherefore? a new
wherefore?--this is what mankind requires.

[Footnote 2: This sentence for ever distinguishes Nietzsche's
aristocracy from our present plutocratic and industrial one, for which,
at the present moment at any rate, it would be difficult to discover
some meaning.--Tr.]

The recognition of the increase of collective power: we should
calculate to what extent the ruin of individuals, of castes, of ages,
and of peoples, is included in this general increase.

The transposition of the ballast of a culture. The cost of every
vast growth: who bears it? Why must it be enormous at the present
time?

General aspect of the future European: the latter regarded as the most
intelligent servile animal, very industrious, at bottom very modest,
inquisitive to excess, multifarious, pampered, weak of will,--a chaos
of cosmopolitan passions and intelligences. How would it be possible
for a stronger race to be bred from him?--Such a race as would have a
classical taste? The classical taste: this is the will to simplicity,
to accentuation, and to happiness made visible, the will to the
terrible, and the courage for psychological nakedness (simplification
is the outcome of the will to accentuate; allowing happiness as well
as nakedness to become visible is a consequence of the will to the
terrible ...). In order to fight one's way out of that chaos, and up
to this form, a certain disciplinary constraint is necessary: a man
should have to choose between either going to the dogs or prevailing.
A ruling race can only arise amid terrible and violent conditions.
Problem: where are the barbarians of the twentieth century? Obviously
they will only show themselves and consolidate themselves after
enormous socialistic crises. They will consist of those elements which
are capable of the greatest hardness towards themselves, and which
can guarantee the most enduring will-power.

The mightiest and most dangerous passions of man, by means of which he
most easily goes to rack and ruin, have been so fundamentally banned
that mighty men themselves have either become impossible or else must
regard themselves as evil, "harmful and prohibited." The losses are
heavy, but up to the present they have been necessary. Now, however,
that a whole host of counter-forces has been reared, by means of the
temporary suppression of these passions (the passion for dominion, the
love of change and deception), their liberation has once more become
possible: they will no longer possess their old savagery. We can now
allow ourselves this tame sort of barbarism: look at our artists and
our statesmen!

The root of all evil: that the slave morality of modesty, chastity,
selflessness, and absolute obedience should have triumphed. Dominating
natures were thus condemned (1) to hypocrisy, (2) to qualms of
conscience,--creative natures regarded themselves as rebels against
God, uncertain and hemmed in by eternal values.

The barbarians showed that the ability of keeping within the bounds
of moderation was not in the scope of their powers: they feared and
slandered the passions and instincts of nature--likewise the aspect
of the ruling Caesars and castes. On the other hand, there arose the
suspicion that all restraint is a form of weakness or of incipient
old age and fatigue (thus La Rochefoucauld suspects that "virtue" is
only a euphemism in the mouths of those to whom vice no longer affords
any pleasure). The capacity for restraint was represented as a matter
of hardness, self-control, asceticism, as a fight with the devil,
etc. etc. The natural delight of aesthetic natures, in measure; the
pleasure derived from the beauty of measure, was overlooked and
denied, because that which was desired was an anti-eudaemonistic
morality. The belief in the pleasure which comes of restraint has
been lacking hitherto--this pleasure of a rider on a fiery steed! The
moderation of weak natures was confounded with the restraint of the
strong!

In short, the best things have been blasphemed because weak or
immoderate swine have thrown a bad light upon them--the best men have
remained concealed--and have often misunderstood themselves.

Vicious and unbridled people: their depressing influence upon the
value of the pussions. It was the appalling barbarity of morality
which was principally responsible in the Middle Ages for the compulsory
recourse to a veritable "league of virtue"--and this was coupled with
an equally appalling exaggeration of all that which constitutes the
value of man. Militant "civilisation" (taming) is in need of all kinds
of irons and tortures in order to maintain itself against terrible and
beast-of-prey natures.

In this case, contusion, although it may have the most nefarious
influences, is quite natural: that which men of power and will are
able to demand of themselves gives them the standard for what they
may also allow themselves. Such natures are the very opposite of the
vicious and the unbridled; although under certain circumstances
they may perpetrate deeds for which an inferior man would be convicted
of vice and intemperance.

In this respect the concept, "all men are equal before God" does
an extraordinary amount of harm; actions and attitudes of mind were
forbidden which belonged to the prerogative of the strong alone, just
as if they were in themselves unworthy of man. All the tendencies of
strong men were brought into disrepute by the fact that the defensive
weapons of the most weak (even of those who were weakest towards
themselves) were established as a standard of valuation.

The confusion went so far that precisely the great virtuosos of life
(whose self-control presents the sharpest contrast to the vicious and
the unbridled) were branded with the most opprobrious names. Even to
this day people feel themselves compelled to disparage a Caesar Borgia:
it is simply ludicrous. The Church has anathematised German Kaisers
owing to their vices: as if a monk or a priest had the right to say
a word as to what a Frederick II. should allow himself. Don Juan is
sent to hell: this is very naif. Has anybody ever noticed that all
interesting men are lacking in heaven? ... This is only a hint to the
girls, as to where they may best find salvation. If one think at all
logically, and also have a profound insight into that which makes a
great man, there, can be no doubt at all that the Church has dispatched
all "great men" to Hades--its fight is against all "greatness in man."

The rights which a man arrogates to himself are relative to the duties
which he sets himself, and to the tasks which he feels capable of
performing. The great majority of men have no right to life, and are
only a misfortune to their higher fellows.

The misunderstanding of egoism: on the part of ignoble natures who
know nothing of the lust of conquest and the insatiability of great
love, and who likewise know nothing of the overflowing feelings of
power which make a man wish to overcome things, to force them over to
himself, and to lay them on his heart, the power which impels an artist
to his material. It often happens also that the active spirit looks
for a field for its activity. In ordinary "egoism" it is precisely the
... "non-ego," the profoundly mediocre creature, the member of the
herd, who wishes to maintain himself--and when this is perceived by the
rarer, more subtle, and less mediocre natures, it revolts them. For the
judgment of the latter is this: "We are the noble! It is much more
important to maintain us than that cattle!"

The degeneration of the ruler and of the ruling classes has been the
cause of all the great disorders in history! Without the Roman Caesars
and Roman society, Christianity would never have prevailed.

When it occurs to inferior men to doubt whether higher men exist, then
the danger is great I It is then that men finally discover that there
are virtues even among inferior, suppressed, and poor-spirited men,
and that everybody is equal before God: which is the non plus ultra
of all confounded nonsense that has ever appeared on earth! For in the
end higher men begin to measure themselves according to the standard
of virtues upheld by the slaves--and discover that they are "proud,"
etc., and that all their higher qualities should be condemned.

When Nero and Caracalla stood at the helm, it was then that the paradox
arose: "The lowest man is of more value than that one on the throne!"
And thus the path was prepared for an image of God which was as
remote as possible from the image of the mightiest,--God on the Cross!

Higher man and gregarious man.--When great men are wanting, the
great of the past are converted into demigods or whole gods: the rise
of religions proves that mankind no longer has any pleasure in man
("nor in woman neither," as in Hamlet's case). Or a host of men are
brought together in a heap, and it is hoped that as a Parliament they
will operate just as tyrannically.

Tyrannising is the distinctive quality of great men; they make inferior
men stupid.

Buckle affords the best example of the extent to which a plebeian
agitator of the mob is incapable of arriving at a clear idea of
the concept, "higher nature." The opinion which he combats so
passionately--that "great men," individuals, princes, statesmen,
geniuses, warriors, are the levers and causes of all great movements,
is instinctively misunderstood by him, as if it meant that all that was
essential and valuable in such a "higher man," was the fact that he
was capable of setting masses in motion; in short, that his sole merit
was the effect he produced.... But the "higher nature" of the great man
resides precisely in being different, in being unable to communicate
with others, in the loftiness of his rank--not in any sort of effect
he may produce even though this be the shattering of both hemispheres.

The Revolution made Napoleon possible: that is its justification.
We ought to desire the anarchical collapse of the whole of our
civilisation if such a reward were to be its result. Napoleon made
nationalism possible: that is the latter's excuse.

The value of a man (apart, of course, from morality and immorality:
because with these concepts a man's worth is not even skimmed) does
not lie in his utility; because he would continue to exist even if
there were nobody to whom he could be useful. And why could not that
man be the very pinnacle of manhood who was the source of the worst
possible effects for his race: so high and so superior, that in his
presence everything would go to rack and ruin from envy?

To appraise the value of a man according to his utility to mankind,
or according to what he costs it, or the damage he is able to inflict
upon it, is just as good and just as bad as to appraise the value
of a work of art according to its effects. But in this way the
value of one man compared with another is not even touched upon. The
"moral valuation," in so far as it is social measures men altogether
according to their effects. But what about the man who has his own
taste on his tongue, who is surrounded and concealed by his isolation,
uncommunicative and not to be communicated with; a man whom no one has
fathomed yet--that is to say, a creature of a higher, and, at any rate,
different species, how would ye appraise his worth, seeing that ye
cannot know him and can compare him with nothing?

Moral valuation was the cause of the most enormous obtuseness
of judgment: the value of a man in himself is underrated,
well-nigh overlooked, practically denied. This is the remains of
simple-minded teleology: the value of man can only be measured with
regard to other men.

To be obsessed by moral considerations presupposes a very low
grade of intellect: it shows that the instinct for special rights,
for standing apart, the feeling of freedom in creative natures, in
"children of God" (or of the devil), is lacking. And irrespective of
whether he preaches a ruling morality or criticises the prevailing
ethical code from the point of view of his own ideal: by doing these
things a man shows that he belongs to the herd--even though he may be
what it is most in need of--that is to say, a "shepherd."

We should substitute morality by the will to our own ends, and
consequently to the means to them.

Concerning the order of rank.--What is it that constitutes the
mediocrity of the typical man? That he does not understand that
things necessarily have their other side; that he combats evil
conditions as if they could be dispensed with, that he will not take
the one with the other; that he would fain obliterate and erase the
specific character of a thing, of a circumstance, of an age, and
of a person, by calling only a portion of their qualities good, and
suppressing the remainder. The "desirability" of the mediocre is that
which we others combat: their ideal is something which shall no
longer contain anything harmful, evil, dangerous, questionable, and
destructive. We recognise the reverse of this: that with every growth
of man his other side must grow as well; that the highest man, if
such a concept be allowed, would be that man who would represent the
antagonistic character of existence most strikingly, and would be its
glory and its only justification.... Ordinary men may only represent
a small corner and nook of this natural character; they perish the
moment the multifariousness of the elements composing them, and the
tension between their antagonistic traits, increases: but this is the
prerequisite for greatness in man. That man should become better and at
the same time more evil, is my formula for this inevitable fact.

The majority of people are only piecemeal and fragmentary examples
of man: only when all these creatures are jumbled together does one
whole man arise Whole ages and whole peoples in this sense, have a
fragmentary character about them; it may perhaps be part of the economy
of human development that man should develop himself only piecemeal.
But, for this reason, one should not forget that the only important
consideration is the rise of the synthetic man; that inferior men, and
by far the great majority of people, are but rehearsals and exercises
out of which here and there a whole man may arise; a man who is a
human milestone, and who indicates how far mankind has advanced up to
a certain point. Mankind does not advance in a straight line,--often
a type is attained which is again lost (for instance, with all the
efforts of three hundred years, we have not reached the men of the
Renaissance again, and in addition to this we must not forget that the
man of the Renaissance was already behind his brother of classical
antiquity).

The superiority of the Greek and the man of the Renaissance is
recognised, but people would like to produce them without the
conditions and causes of which they were the result.

"Purification of taste" can only be the result of the strengthening
of the type. Our society to-day represents only the cultivating
systems, the cultivated man is lacking. The great synthetic man, in
whom the various forces for attaining a purpose are correctly harnessed
together, is altogether wanting. The specimen we possess is the
multifarious man, the most interesting form of chaos that has ever
existed: but not the chaos preceding the creation of the world, but
that following it: Goethe as the most beautiful expression of the
type (completely and utterly un-Olympian!)[3]

[Footnote 3: The Germans always call Goethe the Olympian.--Tr.]

Handel, Leibniz, Goethe, and Bismarck, are characteristic of the
strong German type. They lived with equanimity, surrounded by
contrasts. They were full of that agile kind of strength which
cautiously avoids convictions and doctrines, by using the one as a
weapon against the other, and reserving absolute freedom for themselves.

Of this I am convinced, that if the rise of great and rare men had
been made dependent upon the voices of the multitude (taking for
granted, of course, that the latter knew the qualities which belong
to greatness, and also the price that all greatness pays for its
self-development), then there would never have been any such thing as a
great man!

The fact that things pursue their course independently of the voice
of the many, is the reason why, a few astonishing things have taken
place on earth.

The Order of Rank in Human Values.

A man should not be valued according to isolated acts. Epidermal
actions. Nothing is more rare than a personal act. Class, rank,
race, environment, accident--all these things are much more likely to
be expressed in an action or deed than the "personality" of the doer.

We should on no account jump to the conclusion that there are
many people who are personalities. Some men are but conglomerations
of personalities, whilst the majority are not even one. In all
cases in which those average qualities preponderate, which ensure
the maintenance of the species, to be a personality would involve
unnecessary expense, it would be a luxury in fact, it would be
foolish to demand of anybody that he should be a personality. In such
circumstances everybody is a channel or a transmitting vessel.

A "personality" is a relatively isolated phenomenon; in view of
the superior importance of the continuation of the race at an average
level, a personality might even be regarded as something hostile to
nature. For a personality to be possible, timely isolation and the
necessity for an existence of offence and defence, are prerequisites;
something in the nature of a walled enclosure, a capacity for shutting
out the world; but above all, a much lower degree of sensitiveness
than the average man has, who is too easily infected with the views of
others.

The first question concerning the order of rank: how far is a man
disposed to be solitary or gregarious? (in the latter case, his
value consists in those qualities which secure the survival of his
tribe or his type; in the former case, his qualities are those which
distinguish him from others, which isolate and defend him, and make his
solitude possible).

Consequence: the solitary type should not be valued from the
standpoint of the gregarious type, or vice versa.

Viewed from above, both types are necessary; as is likewise their
antagonism,--and nothing is more thoroughly reprehensible than
the "desire" which would develop a third thing out of the two
("virtue" as hermaphroditism). This is as little worthy of desire as
the equalisation and reconciliation of the sexes. The distinguishing
qualities must be developed ever more and more, the gulf must be made
ever wider....

The concept of degeneration in both cases: the approximation of
the qualities of the herd to those of solitary creatures: and vice
versa--in short, when they begin to resemble each other. This
concept of degeneration is beyond the sphere of moral judgments.

Where the strongest natures are to be sought. The ruin and
degeneration of the solitary species is much greater and more
terrible: they have the instincts of the herd, and the tradition of
values, against them; their weapons of defence, their instincts of
self-preservation, are from the beginning insufficiently strong and
reliable--fortune must be peculiarly favourable to them if they are to
prosper (they prosper best in the lowest ranks and dregs of society;
if ye are seeking personalities it is there that ye will find them
with much greater certainty than in the middle classes!)

When the dispute between ranks and classes, which aims at equality of
rights, is almost settled, the fight will begin against the solitary
person. (In a certain sense the latter can maintain and develop
himself most easily in a democratic society: there where the coarser
means of defence are no longer necessary, and a certain habit of
order, honesty, justice, trust, is already a general condition.) The
strongest must be most tightly bound, most strictly watched, laid
in chains and supervised: this is the instinct of the herd. To them
belongs a regime of self-mastery, of ascetic detachment, of "duties"
consisting in exhausting work, in which one can no longer call one's
soul one's own.

I am attempting an economic justification of virtue. The object is to
make man as useful as possible, and to make him approximate as nearly
as one can to an infallible machine: to this end he must be equipped
with machine-like virtues (he must learn to value those states in
which he works in a most mechanically useful way, as the highest of
all: to this end it is necessary to make him as disgusted as possible
with the other states, and to represent them as very dangerous and
despicable).

Here is the first stumbling-block: the tediousness and monotony
which all mechanical activity brings with it. To learn to endure
this--and not only to endure it, but to see tedium enveloped in a
ray of exceeding charm: this hitherto has been the task of all higher
schools. To learn something which you don't care a fig about, and to
find precisely your "duty" in this "objective" activity; to learn to
value happiness and duty as things apart; this is the invaluable task
and performance of higher schools. It is on this account that the
philologist has, hitherto, been the educator per se: because his
activity, in itself, affords the best pattern of magnificent monotony
in action; under his banner youths learn to "swat": first prerequisite
for the thorough fulfilment of mechanical duties in the future (as
State officials, husbands, slaves of the desk, newspaper readers,
and soldiers). Such an existence may perhaps require a philosophical
glorification and justification more than any other: pleasurable
feelings must be valued by some sort of infallible tribunal, as
altogether of inferior rank; "duty per se" perhaps even the pathos
of reverence in regard to everything unpleasant,--must be demanded
imperatively as that which is above all useful, delightful, and
practical things.... A mechanical form of existence regarded as the
highest and most respectable form of existence, worshipping itself
(type: Kant as the fanatic of the formal concept "Thou shalt").

The economic valuation of all the ideals that have existed
hitherto--that is to say, the selection and rearing of definite
passions and states at the cost of other passions and states. The
lawgiver (or the instinct of the community) selects a number of states
and passions the existence of which guarantees the performance of
regular actions (mechanical actions would thus be the result of the
regular requirements of those passions and states).

In the event of these states and passions containing ingredients
which were painful, a means would have to be found for overcoming
this painfulness by means of a valuation; pain would have to be
interpreted as something valuable, as something pleasurable in a higher
sense. Conceived in a formula: "How does something unpleasant become
pleasant?" For instance, when our obedience and our submission to the
law become honoured, thanks to the energy, power, and self-control
they entail. The same holds good of our public spirit, of our
neighbourliness, of our patriotism, our "humanisation," our "altruism,"
and our "heroism." The object of all idealism should, be to induce
people to do unpleasant things cheerfully.

The belittlement of man must be held as the chief aim for a long
while: because what is needed in the first place is a broad basis from
which a stronger species of man may arise (to what extent hitherto has
every stronger species of man arisen from a substratum of inferior
people?).

The absurd and contemptible form of idealism which would not have
mediocrity mediocre, and which instead of feeling triumphant at being
exceptional, becomes indignant at cowardice, falseness, pettiness,
and wretchedness. We should not wish things to be any different, we
should make the gulfs even wider!--The higher types among men should
be compelled to distinguish themselves by means of the sacrifices which
they make to their own existence.

Principal point of view; distances must be established, but no
contrasts must be created. The middle classes must be dissolved, and
their influence decreased: this is the principal means of maintaining
distances.

Who would dare to disgust the mediocre of their mediocrity! As
you observe, I do precisely the reverse: every step away from
mediocrity--thus do I teach--leads to immorality.

To hate mediocrity is unworthy of a philosopher: it is almost a note of
interrogation to his "right to philosophy." It is precisely because
he is the exception that he must protect the rule and ingratiate all
mediocre people.

What I combat: that an exceptional form should make war upon the
rule--instead of understanding that the continued existence of the rule
is the first condition of the value of the exception. For instance,
there are women who, instead of considering their abnormal thirst for
knowledge as a distinction, would fain dislocate the whole status of
womanhood.

The increase of strength despite the temporary ruin of the
individual:--

A new level must be established;

We must have a method of storing up forces for the maintenance of small
performances, in opposition to economic waste;

Destructive nature must for once be reduced to an instrument of this
economy of the future;

The weak must be maintained, because there is an enormous mass of
finicking work to be done;

The weak and the suffering must be upheld in their belief that
existence is still possible;

Solidarity must be implanted as an instinct opposed to the instinct
of fear and servility;

War must be made upon accident, even upon the accident of "the great
man."

War upon great men justified on economic grounds. Great men are
dangerous; they are accidents, exceptions, tempests, which are strong
enough to question things which it has taken time to build and
establish. Explosive material must not only be discharged harmlessly,
but, if possible, its discharge must be prevented altogether, this is
the fundamental instinct of all civilised society.

He who thinks over the question of how the type man may be elevated
to its highest glory and power, will realise from the start that he
must place himself beyond morality; for morality was directed in its
essentials at the opposite goal--that is to say, its aim was to arrest
and to annihilate that glorious development wherever it was in process
of accomplishment. For, as a matter of fact, development of that sort
implies that such an enormous number of men must be subservient to
it, that a counter-movement is only too natural: the weaker, more
delicate, more mediocre existences, find it necessary to take up sides
against that glory of life and power; and for that purpose they
must get a new valuation of themselves by means of which they are
able to condemn, and if possible to destroy, life in this high degree
of plenitude. Morality is therefore essentially the expression of
hostility to life, in so far as it would overcome vital types.

The strong of the future.--To what extent necessity on the one hand
and accident on the other have attained to conditions from which a
stronger species may be reared: this we are now able to understand
and to bring about consciously; we can now create those conditions
under which such an elevation is possible.

Hitherto education has always aimed at the utility of society: not
the greatest possible utility for the future, but the utility of the
society actually extant. What people required were "instruments" for
this purpose. Provided the wealth of forces were greater, it would
be possible to think of a draft being made upon them, the aim of which
would not be the utility of society, but some future utility.

The more people grasped to what extent the present form of society
was in such a state of transition as sooner or later to be no longer
able to exist for its own sake, but only as a means in the hands of a
stronger race, the more this task would have to be brought forward.

The increasing belittlement of man is precisely the impelling
power which leads one to think of the cultivation of a stronger
race: a race which would have a surplus precisely there where the
dwarfed species was weak and growing weaker (will, responsibility,
self-reliance, the ability to postulate aims for one's self).

The means would be those which history teaches: isolation by means of
preservative interests which would be the reverse of those generally
accepted; exercise in transvalued valuations; distance as pathos; a
clean conscience in what to-day is most despised and most prohibited.

The levelling of the mankind of Europe is the great process which
should not be arrested; it should even be accelerated. The necessity of
cleaving gulfs, of distance, of the order of rank, is therefore
imperative; but not the necessity of retarding the process above
mentioned.

This levelled-down species requires justification as soon as it is
attained: its justification is that it exists for the service of a
higher and sovereign race which stands upon it and can only be elevated
upon its shoulders to the task which it is destined to perform. Not
only a ruling race whose task would be consummated in ruling alone:
but a race with vital spheres of its own, with an overflow of energy
for beauty, bravery, culture, and manners, even for the most abstract
thought; a yea-saying race which would be able to allow itself every
kind of great luxury--strong enough to be able to dispense with the
tyranny of the imperatives of virtue, rich enough to be in no need of
economy or pedantry; beyond good and evil; a forcing-house for rare and
exceptional plants.

Our psychologists, whose glance dwells involuntarily upon the symptoms
of decadence, lead us to mistrust intellect ever more and more. People
persist in seeing only the weakening, pampering, and sickening effects
of intellect, but there are now going to appear:--

New Cynics The union of intellectual
barbarians Experimentalists superiority with well-being
Conquerors and an overflow of strength.

I point to something new: certainly for such a democratic community
there is a danger of barbarians; but these are sought only down below.
There is also another kind of barbarians who come from the heights: a
kind of conquering and ruling natures, which are in search of material
that they can mould. Prometheus was a barbarian of this stamp.

Principal standpoint: one should not suppose the mission of a higher
species to be the leading of inferior men (as Comte does, for
instance); but the inferior should be regarded as the foundation
upon which a higher species may live their higher life--upon which
alone they can stand. The conditions under which a strong, noble
species maintains itself (in the matter of intellectual discipline) are
precisely the reverse of those under which the industrial masses--the
tea-grocers a la Spencer--subsist. Those qualities which are within
the grasp only of the strongest and most terrible natures, and
which make their existence possible leisure, adventure, disbelief, and
even dissipation--would necessarily ruin mediocre natures --and does
do so--when they possess them. In the case of the latter industry,
regularity, moderation, and strong "conviction" are in their proper
place--in short, all "gregarious virtues": under their influence these
mediocre men become perfect.

Concerning the ruling types. The shepherd as opposed to the "lord"
(the former is only a means to the maintenance of the herd; the latter,
the purpose for which the herd exists).

The temporary preponderance of social valuations is both comprehensible
and useful; it is a matter of building a foundation upon which a
stronger species will ultimately be made possible. The standard
of strength: to be able to live under the transvalued valuations,
and to desire them for all eternity. State and society regarded as a
sub-structure: economic point of view, education conceived as breeding.

A consideration which "free spirits" lack: that the same discipline
which makes a strong nature still stronger, and enables it to go in for
big undertakings, breaks up and withers the mediocre: doubt --la
largeur de coeur--experiment--independence.

The hammer. How should men who must value in the opposite way be
constituted?--Men who possess all the qualities of the modern soul,
but are strong enough to convert them into real health? The means to
their task.

The strong man, who is mighty in the instincts of a strong and healthy
organisation, digests his deeds just as well as he digests his meals;
he even gets over the effects of heavy fare: in the main, however, he
is led by an inviolable and severe instinct which prevents his doing
anything which goes against his grain, just as he never does anything
against his taste.

Can we foresee the favourable circumstances under which creatures
of the highest value might arise? It is a thousand times too
complicated, and the probabilities of failure are very great: on that
account we cannot be inspired by the thought of striving after them!
Scepticism.--To oppose this we can enhance courage, insight, hardness,
independence, and the feeling of responsibility; we can also subtilise
and learn to forestall the delicacy of the scales, so that favourable
accidents may be enlisted on our side.

Before we can even think of acting, an enormous amount of work requires
to be done. In the main, however, a cautious exploitation of the
present conditions would be our best and most advisable course of
action. The actual creation of conditions such as those which occur
by accident, presupposes the existence of iron men such as have not
yet lived. Our first task must be to make the personal ideal prevail
and become realised! He who has understood the nature of man and the
origin of mankind's greatest specimens, shudders before man and takes
flight from all action: this is the result of inherited valuations!!

My consolation is, that the nature of man is evil, and this
guarantees his strength!

The typical forms of self-development, or the eight principal
questions:--

Do we want to be more multifarious or more simple than we are?

Do we want to be happier than we are, or more indifferent to both
happiness and unhappiness?

Do we want to be more satisfied with ourselves, or more exacting and
more inexorable?

Do we want to be softer, more yielding, and more human than we are,
or more inhuman?

Do we want to be more prudent than we are, or more daring?

Do we want to attain a goal, or do we want to avoid all goals (like
the philosopher, for instance, who scents a boundary, a cul-de-sac, a
prison, a piece of foolishness in every goal)?

Do we want to become more respected, or more feared, or more
despised?

Do we want to become tyrants, and seducers, or do we want to become
shepherds and gregarious animals?

The type of my disciples.--To such men as concern vie in any way
I wish suffering, desolation, sickness, ill-treatment, indignities of
all kinds. I wish them to be acquainted with profound self-contempt,
with the martyrdom of self-distrust, with the misery of the defeated: I
have no pity for them; because I wish them to have the only thing which
to-day proves whether a man has any value or not, namely, the capacity
of sticking to his guns.

The happiness and self-contentedness of the lazzaroni, or the
blessedness of "beautiful souls," or the consumptive love of Puritan
pietists, proves nothing in regard to the order of rank among men.
As a great educator one ought inexorably to thrash a race of such
blissful creatures into unhappiness. The danger of belittlement and of
a slackening of powers follows immediately I am opposed to happiness
a la Spinoza or a la Epicurus, and to all the relaxation of
contemplative states. But when virtue is the means to such happiness,
well then, one must master even virtue.

I cannot see how any one can make up for having missed going to a
good school at the proper time. Such a person does not know himself;
he walks through life without ever having learned to walk. His soft
muscles betray themselves at every step. Occasionally life itself is
merciful enough to make a man recover this lost and severe schooling:
by means of periods of sickness, perhaps, which exact the utmost
will-power and self-control; or by means of a sudden state of poverty,
which threatens his wife and child, and which may force a man to
such activity as will restore energy to his slackened tendons, and a
tough spirit to his will to life. The most desirable thing of all,
however, is, under all circumstances to have severe discipline at
the right time, i.e. at that age when it makes us proud that people
should expect great things from us. For this is what distinguishes hard
schooling, as good schooling, from every other schooling, namely, that
a good deal is demanded, that a good deal is severely exacted; that
goodness, nay even excellence itself, is required as if it were normal;
that praise is scanty, that leniency is non-existent; that blame is
sharp, practical, and without reprieve, and has no regard to talent and
antecedents. We are in every way in need of such a school: and this
holds good of corporeal as well as of spiritual things; it would be
fatal to draw distinctions here! The same discipline makes the soldier
and the scholar efficient; and, looked at more closely, there is no
true scholar who has not the instincts of a true soldier in his veins.
To be able to command and to be able to obey in a proud fashion; to
keep one's place in rank and file, and yet to be ready at any moment
to lead; to prefer danger to comfort; not to weigh what is permitted
and what is forbidden in a tradesman's balance; to be more hostile to
pettiness, slyness, and parasitism than to wickedness. What is it that
one learns in a hard school?--to obey and to command.

We should repudiate merit--and do only that which stands above all
praise and above all understanding.

The new forms of morality:--

Faithful vows concerning that which one wishes to do or to leave
undone; complete and definite abstention from many things. Tests as to
whether one is ripe for such discipline.

It is my desire to naturalise asceticism: I would substitute the
old intention of asceticism, "self-denial," by my own intention,
self-strengthening: a gymnastic of the will; a period of abstinence
and occasional fasting of every kind, even in things intellectual; a
casuistry in deeds, in regard to the opinions which we derive from our
powers; we should try our hand at adventure and at deliberate dangers.
(Diners chez Magny: all intellectual gourmets with spoilt stomachs.)
Tests ought also to be devised for discovering a man's power in
keeping his word.

The things which have become spoilt through having been abused by the
Church:--

Asceticism.--People have scarcely got the courage yet to bring to
light the natural utility and necessity of asceticism for the purpose
of the education of the will. Our ridiculous world of education,
before whose eyes the useful State official hovers as an ideal to
be striven for, believes that it has completed its duty when it has
instructed or trained the brain; it never even suspects that something
else is first of all necessary --the education of will-power; tests
are devised for everything except for the most important thing of all:
whether a man can will, whether he can promise; the young man
completes his education without a question or an inquiry having been
made concerning the problem of the highest value of his nature.

Fasting:--In every sense--even as a means of maintaining the
capacity for taking pleasure in all good things (for instance, to give
up reading for a while, to hear no music for a while, to cease from
being amiable for a while: one ought also to have fast days for one's
virtues).

The monastery.--Temporary isolation with severe seclusion from
all letters, for instance; a kind of profound introspection and
self-recovery, which does not go out of the way of "temptations," but
out of the way of "duties"; a stepping out of the daily round of one's
environment; a detachment from the tyranny of stimuli and external
influences, which condemns us to expend our power only in reactions,
and does not allow it to gather volume until it bursts into spontaneous
activity (let anybody examine our scholars closely: they only think
reflexively, i.e. they must first read before they can think).

Feasts.--A man must be very coarse in order not to feel the
presence of Christians and Christian values as oppressive, so
oppressive as to send all festive moods to the devil. By feasts we
understand: pride, high-spirits, exuberance; scorn of all kinds of
seriousness and Philistinism; a divine saying of Yea to one's self, as
the result of physical plenitude and perfection--all states to which
the Christian cannot honestly say Yea. A feast is a pagan thing par
excellence.

The courage of ones own nature: dressing-up in morality,--To be
able to call one's passions good without the help of a moral formula:
this is the standard which measures the extent to which a man is able
to say Yea to his own nature, namely, how much or how little he has to
have recourse to morality.

Death.--The foolish physiological fact must be converted into a
moral necessity. One should live in such a way that one may have the
will to die at the right time!

To feel ones self stronger or, expressed otherwise: happiness always
presupposes a comparison (not necessarily with others, but with one's
self, in the midst of a state of growth, and without being conscious
that one is comparing).

Artificial accentuation: whether by means of exciting chemicals or
exciting errors ("hallucinations.")

Take, for instance, the Christian's feeling of security; he feels
himself strong in his confidence, in his patience, and his resignation:
this artificial accentuation he owes to the fancy that he is protected
by a God. Take the feeling of superiority, for instance: as when the
Caliph of Morocco sees only globes on which his three united kingdoms
cover four-fifths of the space. Take the feeling of uniqueness,
for instance: as when the European imagines that culture belongs to
Europe alone, and when he regards himself as a sort of abridged cosmic
process; or, as when the Christian makes all existence revolve round
the "Salvation of man."

The question is, where does one begin to feel the pressure of
constraint: it is thus that different degrees are ascertained. A
philosopher for instance, in the midst of the coolest and most
transmontane feats of abstraction feels like a fish that enters its
element: while colours and tones oppress him; not to speak of those
dumb desires--of that which others call "the ideal."

A healthy and vigorous little boy will look up sarcastically if he be
asked: "Wilt thou become virtuous?"--but he immediately becomes eager
if he be asked: "Wilt thou become stronger than thy comrades?"

How does one become stronger?--By deciding slowly; and by holding
firmly to the decision once it is made. Everything else follows
of itself. Spontaneous and changeable natures: both species of
the weak. We must not confound ourselves with them; we must feel
distance--betimes!

Beware of good-natured people!. Dealings with them make one torpid.
All environment is good which makes one exercise those defensive and;
aggressive powers which are instinctive in man. All one's inventiveness
should apply itself to putting one's power of will to the test....
Here the determining factor must be recognised as something which is
not knowledge, astuteness, or wit.

One must learn to command betimes,--likewise to obey. A man must learn
modesty and tact in modesty: he must learn to distinguish and to
honour where modesty is displayed; he must likewise distinguish and
honour wherever he bestows his confidence.

What does one repent most? One's modesty; the fact that one has not
lent an ear to one's most individual needs; the fact that one has
mistaken one's self; the fact that one has esteemed one's self low;
the fact that one has lost all delicacy of hearing in regard to one's
instincts.--This want of reverence in regard to one's self is avenged
by all sorts of losses: in health, friendship, well-being, pride,
cheerfulness, freedom, determination, courage. A man never forgives
himself, later on, for this want of genuine egoism: he regards it as an
objection and as a cause of doubt concerning his real ego.

I should like man to begin by respecting himself: everything else
follows of itself. Naturally a man ceases from being anything to others
in this way: for this is precisely what they are least likely to
forgive. "What? a man who respects himself?"[4] This is something quite
different from the blind instinct to love one's self. Nothing is more
common in the love of the sexes or in that duality which is called
ego, than a certain contempt for that which is loved the fatalism of
love.

[Footnote 4: Cf. Disraeli in Tancred: "Self-respect, too, is a
superstition of past ages.... It is not suited to these times; it
is much too arrogant, too self-conceited, too egoistical. No one is
important enough to have self-respect nowadays" (book iii. chap.
v.).--Tr.]

"I will have this or that"; "I would that this or that were so"; "I
know that this or that is so the degrees of power: the man of will,
the man of desire, the man of fate.

The means by which a strong species maintains itself:--

It grants itself the right of exceptional actions, as a test of the
power of self-control and of freedom.

It abandons itself to states in which a man is not allowed to be
anything else than a barbarian.

It tries to acquire strength of will by every kind of asceticism.

It is not expansive, it practises silence; it is cautious in regard to
all charms.

It learns to obey in such a way that obedience provides a test of
self-maintenance. Casuistry is carried to its highest pitch in regard
to points of honour.

It never argues, "What is sauce for the goose is sauce for the
gander,"--but conversely! it regards reward, and the ability to repay,
as a privilege, as a distinction.

It does not covet other people's virtues.

The way in which one has to treat raw savages and the impossibility of
dispensing with barbarous methods, becomes obvious, in practice, when
one is transplanted, with all one's European pampering, to a spot such
as the Congo, or anywhere else where it is necessary to maintain one's
mastery over barbarians.

Warlike and peaceful people.--Art thou a man who has the instincts of
a warrior in thy blood? If this be so, another question must be put. Do
thy instincts impel thee to attack or to defend? The rest of mankind,
all those whose instincts are not warlike, desire peace, concord,
freedom, "equal rights": these things are but names and steps for one
and the same thing. Such men only wish to go where it is not necessary
for them to defend themselves,--such men become discontented with
themselves when they are obliged to offer resistance: they would fain
create circumstances in which war is no longer necessary. If the worst
came to the worst, they would resign themselves, obey, and submit: all
these things are better than waging war--thus does the Christian's
instinct, for instance, whisper to him. In the born warrior's
character there is something of armour, likewise in the choice of his
circumstances and in the development of every one of his qualities,
weapons are best evolved by the latter type, shields are best devised
by the former.

What expedients and what virtues do the unarmed and the undefended
require in order to survive--and even to conquer?

What will become of a man who no longer has any reasons for either
defence or attack? What will remain of his passions when he has lost
those which form his defence and his weapons?

A marginal note to a niaiserie anglaise: "Do not to others that
which you would not that they should do unto you." This stands for
wisdom; this stands for prudence; this stands as the very basis of
morality as "a golden maxim." John Stuart Mill believes in it (and what
Englishman does not?).... But the maxim does not bear investigation.
The argument, Do not as you would not be done by, forbids action
which produce harmful results; the thought behind always is that an
action is invariably requited. What if some one came forward with the
"Principe" in his hands, and said: "We must do those actions alone
which enable us to steal a march on others,--and which deprive others
of the power of doing the same to us"?--On the other hand, let us
remember the Corsican who pledges his honour to vendetta. He too does
not desire to have a bullet through him; but the prospect of one, the
probability of getting one, does not deter him from vindicating his
honour.... And in all really decent actions are we not intentionally
indifferent as to what result they will bring? To avoid an action which
might have harmful results,--that would be tantamount to forbidding all
decent actions in general.

Apart from this, the above maxim is valuable because it betrays a
certain type of man: it is the instinct of the herd which formulates
itself through him,--we are equal, we regard each other as equal: as
I am to thee so art thou to me.--In this community equivalence of
actions is really believed in--an equivalence which never under any
circumstances manifests itself in real conditions. It is impossible
to requite every action: among real individuals equal actions do not
exist, consequently there can be no such thing as "requital." ... When
I do anything, I am very far from thinking that any man is able to do
anything at all like it: the action belongs to me.... Nobody can pay
me back for anything I do; the most that can be done is to make me the
victim of another action.

Against John Stuart Mill.--I abhor the man's vulgarity when he says:
"What is right for one man is right for another"; "Do not to others
that which you would not that they should do unto you. Such principles
would fain establish the whole of human traffic upon mutual services,
so that every action would appear to be a cash payment for something
done to us. The hypothesis here is ignoble to the last degree: it
is taken for granted that there is some sort of equivalence in value
between my actions and thine; the most personal value Of an action is
simply cancelled in this manner (that part of an action which has no
equivalent and which cannot be remunerated). "Reciprocity" is a piece
of egregious vulgarity; the mere fact that what I do cannot and may
not be done by another, that there is no such thing as equivalence
(except in those very select circles where one actually has one's
equal, inter pares), that in a really profound sense a man never
requites because he is something unique in himself and can only do
unique things,--this fundamental conviction contains the cause of
aristocratic aloofness from the mob, because the latter believes in
equality, and consequently in the feasibility of equivalence and
"reciprocity."

The suburban Philistinism of moral valuations and of its concepts
"useful" and "harmful" is well founded; it is the necessary point of
view of a community which is only able to see and survey immediate
and proximate consequences. The State and the political man are
already in need of a more super-moral attitude of mind: because
they have to calculate concerning a much more complicated tissue
of consequences. An economic policy for the whole world should be
possible which could look at things in such broad perspective that all
its isolated demands would seem for the moment not only unjust, but
arbitrary.

"Should one follow one's feelings?"--To set one's life at stake on
the impulse of the moment, and actuated by a generous feeling, has
little worth, and does not even distinguish one. Everybody is alike in
being capable of this--and in behaving in this way with determination,
the criminal, the bandit, and the Corsican certainly outstrip the
honest man.

A higher degree of excellence would be to overcome this impulse, and to
refrain from performing an heroic deed at its bidding--and to remain
cold, raisonnable, free from the tempestuous surging of concomitant
sensations of delight.... The same holds good of pity: it must first be
sifted through reason; without this it becomes just as dangerous as
any other passion.

The blind yielding to a passion, whether it be generosity, pity, or
hostility, is the cause of the greatest evil. Greatness of character
does not consist in not possessing these passions--on the contrary, a
man should possess them to a terrible degree: but he should lead them
by the bridle.. and even this he should not do out of love of control,
but merely because....

"To give up one's life for a cause"--very effective. But there are many
things for which one gives up one's life: the passions, one and all,
will be gratified. Whether one's life be pledged to pity, to anger,
or to revenge--it matters not from the point of view of value. How
many have not sacrificed their lives for pretty girls--and even what
is worse, their health! When one has temperament, one instinctively
chooses the most dangerous things: if one is a philosopher, for
instance, one chooses the adventures of speculation; if one is
virtuous, one chooses immorality. One kind of man will risk nothing,
another kind will risk everything. Are we despisers of life? On the
contrary, what we seek is life raised to a higher power, life in
danger.... But, let me repeat, we do not, on that account, wish to
be more virtuous than others, Pascal, for instance, wished to risk
nothing, and remained a Christian. That perhaps was virtuous.----A man
always sacrifices something.

How many advantages does not a man sacrifice! To how small an extent
does he seek his own profit! All his emotions and passions wish to
assert their rights, and how remote a passion is From that cautious
utility which consists in personal profit!

A man does not strive after "happiness"; one must be an Englishman to
be able to believe that a man is always seeking his own advantage. Our
desires long to violate things with passion--their overflowing strength
seeks obstacles.

All passions are generally useful, some directly, others indirectly;
in regard to utility it is absolutely impossible to fix upon any
gradation of values,--however certainly the forces of nature in general
may be regarded as good (i.e. useful), from an economic point of
view, they are still the sources of much that is terrible and much
that is fatally irrevocable. The most one might say would be, that
the mightiest passions are the most valuable: seeing that no stronger
sources of power exist.

All well-meaning, helpful, good-natured attitudes of mind have not
come to be honoured on account of their usefulness: but because they
are the conditions peculiar to rich souls who are able to bestow
and whose value consists in their vital exuberance. Look into the
eyes of the benevolent man! In them you will see the exact reverse of
self-denial, of hatred of self, of Pascalism.

In short, what we require is to dominate the passions and not to
weaken or to extirpate them!--The greater the dominating power of the
will, the greater the freedom that may be given to the passions.

The "great man" is so, owing to the free scope which he gives to his
desires, and to the still greater power which knows how to enlist these
magnificent monsters into its service.

The "good man" in every stage of civilisation is at one and the same
time the least dangerous and the most useful: a sort of medium;
the idea formed of such a man by the common mind is that he is some
one whom one has no reason to fear, but whom one must not therefore
despise.

Education: essentially a means of ruining exceptions in favour of the
rule. Culture: essentially the means of directing taste against the
exceptions in favour of the mediocre.

Only when a culture can dispose of an overflow of force, is it capable
of being a hothouse for the luxurious culture of the exception, of the
experiment, of the danger, of the nuance: this is the tendency of
every aristocratic culture.

All questions of strength: to what extent ought one to try and
prevail against the preservative measures of society and the latter's
prejudices?--to what extent ought one to unfetter one's terrible
qualities, through which so many go to the dogs?--to what extent
ought one to run counter to truth, and take up sides with its most
questionable aspects?--to what extent ought one to oppose suffering,
self-contempt, pity, disease, vice, when it is always open to question
whether one can ever master them (what does not kill us makes us
stronger....)?--and, finally, to what extent ought one to acknowledge
the rights of the rule, of the common-place, of the petty, of the good,
of the upright, in fact of the average man, without thereby allowing
one's self to become vulgar? ... The strongest test of character is to
resist being ruined by the seductiveness of goodness. Goodness must
be regarded as a luxury, as a refinement, as a vice.

The Noble Man.

Type. real goodness, nobility, greatness of soul, as the result of
vital wealth: which does not give in order to receive--and which has no
desire to elevate itself by being good, squandering is typical of
genuine goodness, vital personal wealth is its prerequisite.

Aristocracy.--Gregarious ideals at present culminating in the highest
standard of value for society. It has been attempted to give them a
cosmic, yea, and even a metaphysical, value.--I defend aristocracy
against them.

Any society which would of itself preserve a feeling of respect
and delicatesse in regard to freedom, must consider itself as an
exception, and have a force against it from which it distinguishes
itself, and upon which it looks down with hostility.

The more rights I surrender and the more I level myself down to others,
the more deeply do I sink into the average and ultimately into the
greatest number. The first condition which an aristocratic society
must have in order to maintain a high degree of freedom among its
members, is that extreme tension which arises from the presence of
the most antagonistic instincts in all its units: from their will to
dominate....

If ye would fain do away with strong contrasts and differences of rank,
ye will also abolish, strong love, lofty attitudes of mind, and the
feeling of individuality.

Concerning the actual psychology of societies based upon freedom and
equality.--What is it that tends to diminish in such a society?

The will to be responsible for ones self (the loss of this is a sign
of the decline of autonomy); the ability to defend and to attack, even
in spiritual matters; the power of command; the sense of reverence,
of subservience, the ability to be silent, great passion, great
achievements, tragedy and cheerfulness.

In 1814 Augustin Thierry read what Montlosier had said in his work, De
la Monarchie francaise: he answered with a cry of indignation, and set
himself to his task. That emigrant had said:

"Race d'affranchis, race d'esclaves arraches de nos mains, peuple
tributaire, peuple nouveau, licence vous fut octroyee d'etre libres,
et non pas a nous d'etre nobles; pour nous tout est de droit, pour
vous tout est de grace, nous ne sommes point de votre communaute; nous
sommes un tout par nous memes."

How constantly the aristocratic world shears and weakens itself ever
more and more! By means of its noble instincts it abandons its
privileges, and owing to its refined and excessive culture, it takes
an interest in the people, the weak, the poor, and the poetry of the
lowly, etc.

There is such a thing as a noble and dangerous form of carelessness,
which allows of profound conclusions and insight: the carelessness
of the self-reliant and over-rich soul, which has never troubled
itself about friends, but which knows only hospitality and knows
how to practise it; whose heart and house are open to all who will
enter--beggar, cripple, or king. This is genuine sociability: he who is
capable of it has hundreds of "friends," but probably not one friend.

The teaching mehden agan applies to men with overflowing
strength,--not to the mediocre, egkrateia and askehsis are only
steps to higher things. Above them stands "golden Nature."

"Thou shalt"--unconditional obedience in Stoics, in Christian and
Arabian Orders, in Kant's philosophy (it is immaterial whether this
obedience is shown to a superior or to a concept).

Higher than "Thou shalt" stands "I will" (the heroes); higher than "I
will" stands "I am" (the gods of the Greeks).

Barbarian gods express nothing of the pleasure of restraint,--they are
neither simple, nor light-hearted, nor moderate.

The essence of our gardens and palaces (and to the same extent the
essence of all yearning after riches) is the desire to rid the eye of
disorder and vulgarity, and to build a home for our soul's nobility.

The majority of people certainly believe that they will develop higher
natures when those beautiful and peaceful things have operated upon
them: hence the exodus to Italy, hence all travelling, etc., and all
reading and visits to theatres. People want to be formed--that is the
kernel of their labours for culture! But the strong, the mighty, would
themselves have a hand in the forming, and would fain have nothing
strange about them!

It is for this reason, too, that men go to open Nature, not to find
themselves, but to lose themselves and to forget themselves. The desire
"to get away from one's self" is proper to all weaklings, and to all
those who are discontented with themselves.

The only nobility is that of birth and blood. (I do not refer here to
the prefix "Lord" and L'almanac de Gotha: this is a parenthesis for
donkeys.) Wherever people speak of the "aristocracy of intellect,"
reasons are generally not lacking for concealing something, it is
known to be a password among ambitious Jews. Intellect alone does
not ennoble; on the contrary, something is always needed to ennoble
intellect.--What then is needed?--Blood.

What is noble?

--External punctiliousness; because this punctiliousness hedges a man
about, keeps him at a distance, saves him from being confounded with
somebody else.

A frivolous appearance in word, clothing, and bearing, with which
stoical hardness and self-control protect themselves from all prying
inquisitiveness or curiosity.

--A slow step and a slow glance. There are not too many valuable things
on earth: and these come and wish to come of themselves to him who has
value. We are not quick to admire.

--We know how to bear poverty, want, and even illness.

--We avoid small honours owing to our mistrust of all who are
over-ready to praise: for the man who praises believes he understands
what he praises: but to understand--Balzac, that typical man of
ambition, betrayed the fact comprendre c'est egaler.

--Our doubt concerning the communicativeness of our hearts goes very
deep; to us, loneliness is not a matter of choice, it is imposed upon
us.

--We are convinced that we only have duties to our equals, to others we
do as we think best: we know that justice is only to be expected among
equals (alas! this will not be realised for some time to come),

--We are ironical towards the "gifted"; we hold the belief that no
morality is possible without good birth.

--We always feel as if we were those who had to dispense honours: while
he is not found too frequently who would be worthy of honouring us.

--We are always disguised: the higher a man's nature the more is he
in need of remaining incognito. If there be a God, then out of sheer
decency He ought only to show Himself on earth in the form of a man.

--We are capable of otium, of the unconditional conviction that
although a handicraft does not shame one in any sense, it certainly
reduces one's rank. However much we may respect "industry," and know
how to give it its due, we do not appreciate it in a bourgeois sense,
or after the manner of those insatiable and cackling artists who, like
hens, cackle and lay eggs, and cackle again.

--We protect artists and poets and any one who happens to be a master
in something; but as creatures of a higher order than those, who only
know how to do something, who are only "productive men," we do not
confound ourselves with them.

--We find joy in all forms and ceremonies; we would fain foster
everything formal, and we are convinced that courtesy is one of the
greatest virtues; we feel suspicious of every kind of laisser aller,
including the freedom of the press and of thought; because, under such
conditions, the intellect grows easy-going and coarse, and stretches
its limbs.

--We take pleasure in women as in a perhaps daintier, more delicate,
and more ethereal kind of creature. What a treat it is to meet
creatures who have only dancing and nonsense and finery in their
minds! They have always been the delight of every tense and profound
male soul, whose life is burdened with heavy responsibilities.

--We take pleasure in princes and in priests, because in big things, as
in small, they actually uphold the belief in the difference of human
values, even in the estimation of the past, and at least symbolically.

--We are able to keep silence i but we do not breathe a word of this
in the presence of listeners.

--We are able to endure long enmities: we lack the power of easy
reconciliations.

--We have a loathing of demagogism, of enlightenment, of amiability,
and plebeian familiarity.

--We collect precious things, the needs of higher and fastidious souls;
we wish to possess nothing in common. We want to have our own books,
our own landscapes.

--We protest against evil and fine experiences, and take care not to
generalise too quickly. The individual case: how ironically we regard
it when it has the bad taste to put on the airs of a rule!

--We love that which is naif, and naif people, but as spectators
and higher creatures; we think Faust is just as simple as his Margaret.

--We have a low estimation of good people, because they are gregarious
animals: we know how often an invaluable golden drop of goodness
lies concealed beneath the most evil, the most malicious, and the
hardest exterior, and that this single grain outweighs all the mere
goody-goodiness of milk-and-watery souls.

--We don't regard a man of our kind as refuted by his vices, nor by his
tomfooleries. We are well aware that we are not recognised with ease,
and that we have every reason to make our foreground very prominent.

What is noble?--The fact that one is constantly forced to be playing
a part. That one is constantly searching for situations in which one
is forced to put on airs. That one leaves happiness to the greatest
number: the happiness which consists of inner peacefulness, of virtue,
of comfort, and of Anglo-angelic-back-parlour-smugness, a la Spencer.
That one instinctively seeks for heavy responsibilities. That one knows
how to create enemies everywhere, at a pinch even in one's self. That
one contradicts the greatest number, not in words at all, but by
continually behaving differently from them.

Virtue (for instance, truthfulness) is our most noble and most
dangerous luxury. We must not decline the disadvantages which it brings
in its train.

We refuse to be praised: we do what serves our purpose, what gives us
pleasure, or what we are obliged to do.

What is chastity in a man? It means that his taste in sex has remained
noble; that in eroticis he likes neither the brutal, the morbid, nor
the clever.

The concept of honour is founded upon the belief in select society,
in knightly excellences, in the obligation of having continually to
play a part. In essentials it means that one does not take one's life
too seriously, that one adheres unconditionally to the most dignified
manners in one's dealings with everybody (at least in so far as they do
not belong to "us"); that one is neither familiar, nor good-natured,
nor hearty, nor modest, except inter pares; that one is always
playing a part.

The fact that one sets one's life, one's health, and one's honour
at stake, is the result of high spirits and of an overflowing and
spendthrift will: it is not the result of philanthropy, but of the fact
that every danger kindles our curiosity concerning the measure of our
strength, and provokes our courage.

Eagles swoop down straight nobility of soul is best revealed by the
magnificent and proud foolishness with which it makes its attacks.

War should be made against all namby-pamby ideas of nobility!--A
certain modicum of brutality cannot be dispensed with: no more
than we can do without a certain approximation to criminality.
"Self-satisfaction" must not be allowed; a man should look upon
himself with an adventurous spirit; he should experiment with himself
and run risks with himself--no beautiful soul-quackery should be
tolerated. I want to give a more robust ideal a chance of prevailing.

"Paradise is under the shadow of a swordsman"--this is also a symbol
and a test-word by which souls with noble and warrior-like origin
betray and discover themselves.

The two paths.--There comes a period when man has a surplus amount
of power at his disposal. Science aims at establishing the slavery of
nature.

Then man acquires the leisure in which to develop himself into
something new and more lofty. A new aristocracy. It is then that a
large number of virtues which are now conditions of existence are
superseded.--Qualities which are no longer needed are on that account
lost. We no longer need virtues: consequently we are losing them
(likewise the morality of "one thing is needful," of the salvation of
the soul, and of immortality: these were means wherewith to make man
capable of enormous self-tyranny, through the emotion of great fear!!!).

The different kinds of needs by means of whose discipline man is
formed: need teaches work, thought, and self-control.

Physiological purification and strengthening. The new aristocracy is
in need of an opposing body which it may combat: it must be driven to
extremities in order to maintain itself.

The two futures of mankind: (1) the consequence of a levelling-down
to mediocrity, (2) conscious aloofness and self-development.

A doctrine which would cleave a gulf: it maintains the highest and
the lowest species (it destroys the intermediate).

The aristocracies, both spiritual and temporal, which have existed
hitherto prove nothing against the necessity of a new aristocracy.

The Lords of the Earth.

A certain question constantly recurs to us; it is perhaps a seductive
and evil question; may it be whispered into the ears of those who
have a right to such doubtful problems--those strong souls of to-day
whose dominion over themselves is unswerving: is it not high time,
now that the type "gregarious animal" is developing ever more and
more in Europe, to set about rearing, thoroughly, artificially, and
consciously, an opposite type, and to attempt to establish the latter's
virtues? And would not the democratic movement itself find for the
first time a sort of goal, salvation, and justification, if some one
appeared who availed himself of it--so that at last, beside its new
and sublime product, slavery (for this must be the end of European
democracy), that higher species of ruling and Caesarian spirits might
also be produced, which would stand upon it, hold to it, and would
elevate themselves through it? This new race would climb aloft to new
and hitherto impossible things, to a broader vision, and to its task on
earth.

The aspect of the European of to-day makes me very hopeful. A daring
and ruling race is here building itself up upon the foundation of
an extremely intelligent, gregarious mass. It is obvious that the
educational movements for the latter are not alone prominent nowadays.

The same conditions which go to develop the gregarious animal also
force the development of the leaders.

The question, and at the same time the task, is approaching with
hesitation, terrible as Fate, but nevertheless inevitable: how shall
the earth as a whole be ruled? And to what end shall man as a whole--no
longer as a people or as a race--be reared and trained?

Legislative moralities are the principal means by which one can form
mankind, according to the fancy of a creative and profound will:
provided, of course, that such an artistic will of the first order gets
the power into its own hands, and can make its creative will prevail
over long periods in the form of legislation, religions, and morals.
At present, and probably for some time to come, one will seek such
colossally creative men, such really great men, as I understand them,
in vain: they will be lacking, until, after many disappointments, we
are forced to begin to understand why it is they are lacking, and that
nothing bars with greater hostility their rise and development, at
present and for some time to come, than that which is now called the
morality in Europe. Just as if there were no other kind of morality,
and could be no other kind, than the one we have already characterised
as herd-morality. It is this morality which is now striving with
all its power to attain to that green-meadow happiness on earth,
which consists in security, absence of danger, ease, facilities for
livelihood, and, last but not least, "if all goes well," even hopes
to dispense with all kinds of shepherds and bell-wethers. The two
doctrines which it preaches most universally are "equality of rights"
and "pity for all sufferers"--and it even regards suffering itself as
something which must be got rid of absolutely. That such ideas may be
modern leads one to think very poorly of modernity. He, however, who
has reflected deeply concerning the question, how and where the plant
man has hitherto grown most vigorously, is forced to believe that this
has always taken place under the opposite conditions; that to this end
the danger of the situation has to increase enormously, his inventive
faculty and dissembling powers have to fight their way up under long
oppression and compulsion, and his will to life has to be increased
to the unconditioned will to power, to over-power: he believes that
danger, severity, violence, peril in the street and in the heart,
inequality of rights, secrecy, stoicism, seductive art, and devilry of
every kind--in short, the opposite of all gregarious desiderata--are
necessary for the elevation of man. Such a morality with opposite
designs, which would rear man upwards instead of to comfort and
mediocrity; such a morality, with the intention of producing a ruling
caste--the future lords of the earth--must, in order to be taught at
all, introduce itself as if it were in some way correlated to the
prevailing moral law, and must come forward under the cover of the
latter's words and forms. But seeing that, to this end, a host of
transitionary and deceptive measures must be discovered, and that the
life of a single individual stands for almost nothing in view of the
accomplishment of such lengthy tasks and aims, the first thing that
must be done is to rear a new kind of man in whom the duration of
the necessary will and the necessary instincts is guaranteed for many
generations. This must be a new kind of ruling species and caste--this
ought to be quite as clear as the somewhat lengthy and not easily
expressed consequences of this thought. The aim should be to prepare
a transvaluation of values for a particularly strong kind of man,
most highly gifted in intellect and will, and, to this end, slowly
and cautiously to liberate in him a whole host of slandered instincts
hitherto held in check: whoever meditates about this problem belongs
to us, the free spirits--certainly not to that kind of "free spirit"
which has existed hitherto: for these desired practically the reverse.
To this order, it seems to me, belong, above all, the pessimists of
Europe, the poets and thinkers of a revolted idealism, in so far as
their discontent with existence in general must consistently at least
have led them to be dissatisfied with the man of the present; the same
applies to certain insatiably ambitious artists who courageously and
unconditionally fight against the gregarious animal for the special
rights of higher men, and subdue all herd-instincts and precautions
of more exceptional minds by their seductive art. Thirdly and lastly,
we should include in this group all those critics and historians by
whom the discovery of the Old World, which has begun so happily--this
was the work of the new Columbus, of German intellect--will be
courageously continued (for we still stand in the very first stages
of this conquest). For in the Old World, as a matter of fact, a
different and more lordly morality ruled than that of to-day; and the
man of antiquity, under the educational ban of his morality, was a
stronger and deeper man than the man of to-day--up to the present he
has been the only well-constituted man. The temptation, however, which
from antiquity to the present day has always exercised its power on
such lucky strokes of Nature, i.e. on strong and enterprising souls,
is, even at the present day, the most subtle and most effective of
anti-democratic and anti-Christian powers, just as it was in the time
of the Renaissance.

I am writing for a race of men which does not yet exist: for "the lords
of the earth."

In Plato's Theages the following passage will be found: "Every one
of us would like if possible to be master of mankind; if possible, a
God!" This attitude of mind must be reinstated in our midst.

Englishmen, Americans, and Russians.

That primeval forest-plant Man always appears where the struggle for
power has been waged longest. Great men.

Primeval forest creatures, the Romans.

From now henceforward there will be such favourable first conditions
for greater ruling powers as have never yet been found on earth.
And this is by no means the most important point. The establishment
has been made possible of international race unions which will set
themselves the task of rearing a ruling race, the future "lords
of the earth"--a new, vast aristocracy based upon the most severe
self-discipline, in which the will of philosophical men of power and
artist-tyrants will be stamped upon thousands of years: a higher
species of men which, thanks to their preponderance of will, knowledge,
riches, and influence, will avail themselves of democratic Europe as
the most suitable and supple instrument they can have for taking the
fate of the earth into their own hands, and working as artists upon man
himself. Enough! The time is coming for us to transform all our views
on politics.

The Great Man.

I will endeavour to see at which periods in history great men arise.
The significance of despotic moralities that have lasted a long time:
they strain the bow, provided they do not break it.

A great man,--a man whom Nature has built up and invented in a grand
style,--What is such a man? First, in his general course of action
his consistency is so broad that owing to its very breadth it can be
surveyed only with difficulty, and consequently misleads; he possesses
the capacity of extending his will over great stretches of his life,
and of despising and rejecting all small things, whatever most
beautiful and "divine" things of the world there may be among them.
Secondly, he is colder, harder, less cautious and more free from
the fear of "public opinion"; he does not possess the virtues which
are compatible with respectability and with being respected, nor any
of those things which are counted among the "virtues of the herd." If
he is unable to lead, he walks alone; he may then perchance grunt
at many things which he meets on his way. Thirdly, he asks for no
"compassionate" heart, but servants, instruments; in his dealings with
men his one aim is to make something out of them. He knows that he
cannot reveal himself to anybody: he thinks it bad taste to become
familiar; and as a rule he is not familiar when people think he is.
When he is not talking to his soul, he wears a mask. He would rather
lie than tell the truth, because lying requires more spirit and will.
There is a loneliness within his heart which neither praise nor blame
can reach, because he is his own judge from whom is no appeal.

The great man is necessarily a sceptic (I do not mean to say by this
that he must appear to be one), provided that greatness consists in
this: to will something great, together with the means thereto.
Freedom from any kind of conviction is a factor in his strength
of will. And thus it is in keeping with that "enlightened form of
despotism" which every great passion exercises. Such a passion enlists
intellect in its service; it even has the courage for unholy means;
it creates without hesitation; it allows itself convictions, it even
uses them, but it never submits to them. The need of faith and
of anything unconditionally negative or affirmative is a proof of
weakness; all weakness is weakness of will. The man of faith, the
believer, is necessarily an inferior species of man. From this it
follows that "all freedom of spirit," i.e. instinctive scepticism, is
the prerequisite of greatness.

The great man is conscious of his power over a people, and of the fact
that he coincides temporarily with a people or with a century--this
magnifying of his self-consciousness as causa and voluntas
is misunderstood as "altruism": he feels driven to means of
communication: all great men are inventive in such means. They want
to form great communities in their own image; they would fain give
multiformity and disorder definite shape; it stimulates them to behold
chaos.

The misunderstanding of love. There is a slavish love which
subordinates itself and gives itself away--which idealises and deceives
itself; there is a divine species of love which despises and loves at
the same time, and which remodels and elevates the thing it loves.

The object is to attain that enormous energy of greatness which can
model the man of the future by means of discipline and also by means
of the annihilation of millions of the bungled and botched, and which
can yet avoid going to ruin at the sight of the suffering created
thereby, the like of which has never been seen before.

The revolution, confusion, and distress of whole peoples is in my
opinion of less importance than the misfortunes which attend great
individuals in their development. We must not allow ourselves to be
deceived: the many misfortunes of all these small folk do not together
constitute a sum-total, except in the feelings of mighty men.--To
think of one's self in moments of great danger, and to draw ones own
advantage from the calamities of thousands in the case of the man
who differs very much from the common ruck--may be a sign of a great
character which is able to master its feeling of pity and justice.

In contradistinction to the animal, man has developed such a host
of antagonistic instincts and impulses in himself, that he has
become master of the earth by means of this synthesis.--Moralities
are only the expression of local and limited orders of rank in this
multifarious world of instincts which prevent man from perishing
through their antagonism. Thus a masterful instinct so weakens and
subtilises the instinct which opposes it that it becomes an impulse
which provides the stimulus for the activity of the principal
instinct.

The highest man would have the greatest multifariousness in his
instincts, and he would possess these in the relatively strongest
degree in which he is able to endure them. As a matter of fact,
wherever the plant, man, is found strong, mighty instincts are to be
found opposing each other (e.g. Shakespeare), but they are subdued.

Would one not be justified in reckoning all great men among the
wicked? This is not so easy to demonstrate in the case of
individuals. They are so frequently capable of masterly dissimulation
that they very often assume the airs and forms of great virtues. Often,
too, they seriously reverence virtues, and in such a way as to be
passionately hard towards themselves; but as the result of cruelty.
Seen from a distance such things are liable to deceive. Many, on the
other hand, misunderstand themselves; not infrequently, too, a great
mission will call forth great qualities, e.g. justice. The essential
fact is: the greatest men may also perhaps have great virtues, but then
they also have the opposites of these virtues. I believe that it is
precisely out of the presence of these opposites and of the feelings
they suscitate, that the great man arises,--for the great man is the
broad arch which spans two banks lying far apart.

In great men we find the specific qualities of life in their highest
manifestation: injustice, falsehood, exploitation. But inasmuch as
their effect has always been overwhelming, their essential nature has
been most thoroughly misunderstood, and interpreted as goodness. The
type of such an interpreter would be Carlyle.[5]

[Footnote 5: This not only refers to Heroes and Hero-Worship,
but doubtless to Carlyle's prodigious misunderstanding of Goethe a
misunderstanding which still requires to be put right by a critic
untainted by Puritanism.--Tr.]

Generally speaking, everything is worth no more and no less than one
has paid for it. This of course does not hold good in the case of an
isolated individual; the great capacities of the individual have no
relation whatsoever to that which he has done, sacrificed, and suffered
for them. But if one should examine the previous history of his race
one would be sure to find the record of an extraordinary storing up and
capitalising of power by means of all kinds of abstinence, struggle,
industry, and determination. It is because the great man has cost so
much, and not because he stands there as a miracle, as a gift from
heaven, or as an accident, that he became great: "Heredity" is a false
notion. A man's ancestors have always paid the price of what he is.

The danger of modesty. To adapt ourselves too early to duties,
societies, and daily schemes of work in which accident may have placed
us, at a time when neither our powers nor our aim in life has stepped
peremptorily into our consciousness; the premature certainty of
conscience and feeling of relief and of sociability which is acquired
by this precocious, modest attitude, and which appears to our minds
as a deliverance from those inner and outer disturbances of our
feelings--all this pampers and keeps a man down in the most dangerous
fashion imaginable. To learn to respect things which people about us
respect, as if we had no standard or right of our own to determine
values; the strain of appraising things as others appraise them,
counter to the whisperings of our inner taste, which also has a
conscience of its own, becomes a terribly subtle kind of constraint:
and if in the end no explosion takes place which bursts all the bonds
of love and morality at once, then such a spirit becomes withered,
dwarfed, feminine, and objective. The reverse of this is bad enough,
but still it is better than the foregoing: to suffer from one's
environment, from its praise just as much as from its blame; to be
wounded by it and to fester inwardly without betraying the fact; to
defend one's self involuntarily and suspiciously against its love; to
learn to be silent, and perchance to conceal this by talking; to create
nooks and safe, lonely hiding-places where one can go and take breath
for a moment, or shed tears of sublime comfort--until at last one has
grown strong enough to say: "What on earth have I to do with you?" and
to go one's way alone.

Those men who are in themselves destinies, and whose advent is the
advent of fate, the whole race of heroic bearers of burdens: oh!
how heartily and gladly would they have respite from themselves for
once in a while!--how they crave after stout hearts and shoulders, that
they might free themselves, were it but for an hour or two, from that
which oppresses them! And how fruitlessly they crave! ... They wait;
they observe all that passes before their eyes: no man even cometh nigh
to them with a thousandth part of their suffering and passion, no man
guesseth to what end they have waited.... At last, at last, they learn
the first lesson of their life: to wait no longer; and forthwith they
learn their second lesson: to be affable, to be modest; and from that
time onwards to endure everybody and every kind of thing--in short, to
endure still a little more than they had endured theretofore.

The Highest Man as Lawgiver of the Future.

The lawgivers of the future.--After having tried for a long time in
vain to attach a particular meaning to the word "philosopher,"--for I
found many antagonistic traits, I recognised that we can distinguish
between two kinds of philosophers:--

Those who desire to establish any large system of values (logical
or moral);

Those who are the lawgivers of such valuations.

The former try to seize upon the world of the present or the past,
by embodying or abbreviating the multifarious phenomena by means of
signs: their object is to make it possible for us to survey, to reflect
upon, to comprehend, and to utilise everything that has happened
hitherto--they serve the purpose of man by using all past things to the
benefit of his future.

The second class, however, are commanders; they say: "Thus shall it
be!" They alone determine the "whither" and the "wherefore," and that
which will be useful and beneficial to man; they have command over the
previous work of scientific men, and all knowledge is to them only
a means to their creations. This second kind of philosopher seldom
appears; and as a matter of fact their situation and their danger is
appalling. How often have they not intentionally blindfolded their
eyes in order to shut out the sight of the small strip of ground which
separates them from the abyss and from utter destruction. Plato, for
instance, when he persuaded himself that "the good," as he wanted it,
was not Plato's good, but "the good in itself," the eternal treasure
which a certain man of the name of Plato had chanced to find on his
way! This same will to blindness prevails in a much coarser form in the
case of the founders of religion; their "Thou shalt" must on no account
sound to their ears like "I will,"--they only dare to pursue their task
as if under the command of God; their legislation of values can only be
a burden they can bear if they regard it as "revelation," in this way
their conscience is not crushed by the responsibility.

As soon as those two comforting expedients--that of Plato and that of
Muhammed--have been overthrown, and no thinker can any longer relieve
his conscience with the hypothesis "God" or "eternal values," the
claim of the lawgiver to determine new values rises to an awfulness
which has not yet been experienced. Now those elect, on whom the
faint light of such a duty is beginning to dawn, try and see whether
they cannot escape it--as their greatest danger--by means of a timely
side-spring: for instance, they try to persuade themselves that their
task is already accomplished, or that it defies accomplishment, or that
their shoulders are not broad enough for such burdens, or that they
are already taken up with burdens closer to hand, or even that this
new and remote duty is a temptation and a seduction, drawing them away
from all other duties; a disease, a kind of madness. Many, as a matter
of fact, do succeed in evading the path appointed to them: throughout
the whole of history we can see the traces of such deserters and their
guilty consciences. In most cases,, however, there comes to such men
of destiny that hour of delivery, that autumnal season of maturity, in
which they are forced to do that which they did not even "wish to do":
and that deed before which in the past they have trembled most, falls
easily and unsought from the tree, as an involuntary deed, almost as a
present.

The human horizon.--Philosophers may be conceived as men who make
the greatest efforts to discover to what extent man can elevate
himself--this holds good more particularly of Plato: how far man's
power can extend. But they do this as individuals; perhaps the
instinct of Caesars and of all founders of states, etc., was greater,
for it preoccupied itself with the question how far man could be urged
forward in development under "favourable circumstances." What they
did not sufficiently understand, however, was the nature of favourable
circumstances. The great question: "Where has the plant 'man' grown
most magnificently heretofore? In order to answer this, a comparative
study of history is necessary.

Every fact and every work exercises a fresh persuasion over every age
and every new species of man. History always enunciates new truths.

To remain objective, severe, firm, and hard while making a thought
prevail is perhaps the best forte of artists; but if for this purpose
any one have to work upon human material (as teachers, statesmen,
have to do, etc.), then the repose, the coldness, and the hardness
soon vanish. In natures like Caesar and Napoleon we are able to divine
something of the nature of "disinterestedness" in their work on their
marble, whatever be the number of men that are sacrificed in the
process. In this direction the future of higher men lies: to bear the
greatest responsibilities and not to go to rack and ruin through
them.--Hitherto the deceptions of inspiration have almost always been
necessary for a man not to lose faith in his own hand, and in his right
to his task.

The reason why philosophers are mostly failures. Because among the
conditions which determine them there are qualities which generally
ruin other men:--

A philosopher must have an enormous multiplicity of qualities; he
must be a sort of abbreviation of man and have all man's high and base
desires: the danger of the contrast within him, and of the possibility
of his loathing himself;

He must be inquisitive in an extraordinary number of ways: the
danger of versatility;

He must be just and honest in the highest sense, but profound both
in love and hate (and in injustice);

He must not only be a spectator but a lawgiver: a judge and
defendant (in so far as he is an abbreviation of the world);

He must be extremely multiform and yet firm and hard. He must be
supple.

The really regal calling of the philosopher (according to the
expression of Alcuin the Anglo-Saxon): "Prava corrigere, et recta
corroborare, et sancta sublimare."

The new philosopher can only arise in conjunction with a ruling class,
as the highest spiritualisation of the latter. Great politics, the
rule of the earth, as a proximate contingency, the total lack of
principles necessary thereto.

Fundamental concept: the new values must first be created--this remains
our duty! The philosopher must be our lawgiver. New species. (How the
greatest species hitherto [for instance, the Greeks] were reared: this
kind of accident must now be consciously striven for.)

Supposing one thinks of the philosopher as an educator who, looking
down from his lonely elevation, is powerful enough to draw long chains
of generations up to him: then he must be granted the most terrible
privileges of a great educator. An educator never says what he himself
thinks; but only that which he thinks it is good for those whom he is
educating to hear upon any subject. This dissimulation on his part
must not be found out; it is part of his masterliness that people
should believe in his honesty, he must be capable of all the means of
discipline and education: there are some natures which he will only be
able to raise by means of lashing them with his scorn; others who are
lazy, irresolute, cowardly, and vain, he will be able to affect only
with exaggerated praise. Such a teacher stands beyond good and evil,
but nobody must know that he does.

We must not make men "better," we must not talk to them about
morality in any form as if "morality in itself," or an ideal kind
of man in general, could be taken for granted; but we must create
circumstances in which stronger men are necessary, such as for
their part will require a morality (or, better still: a bodily and
spiritual discipline) which makes men strong, and upon which they will
consequently insist! As they will need one so badly, they will have it.

We must not let ourselves be seduced by blue eyes and heaving breasts:
greatness of soul has absolutely nothing romantic about it. And
unfortunately nothing whatever amiable either.

From warriors we must learn: (1) to associate death with those
interests for which we are fighting--that makes us venerable; (2) we
must learn to sacrifice numbers, and to take our cause sufficiently
seriously not to spare men; (3) we must practise inexorable discipline,
and allow ourselves violence and cunning in war.

The education which rears those ruling virtues that allow a man to
become master of his benevolence and his pity: the great disciplinary
virtues ("Forgive thine enemies" is mere child's play beside them),
and the passions of the creator, must be elevated to the heights--we
must cease from carving marble! The exceptional and powerful position
of those creatures (compared with that of all princes hitherto): the
Roman Caesar with Christ's soul.

We must not separate greatness of soul from intellectual greatness. For
the former involves independence; but without intellectual greatness
independence should not be allowed; all it does is to create disasters
even in its lust of well-doing and of practising "justice." Inferior
spirits must obey, consequently they cannot be possessed of greatness.

The more lofty philosophical man who is surrounded by loneliness, not
because he wishes to be alone, but because he is what he is, and cannot
find his equal: what a number of dangers and torments are reserved for
him, precisely at the present time, when we have lost our belief in
the order of rank, and consequently no longer know how to understand
or honour this isolation! Formerly the sage almost sanctified himself
in the consciences of the mob by going aside in this way; to-day
the anchorite sees himself as though enveloped in a cloud of gloomy
doubt and suspicions. And not alone by the envious and the wretched:
in every well-meant act that he experiences he is bound to discover
misunderstanding, neglect, and superficiality. He knows the crafty
tricks of foolish pity which makes these people feel so good and holy
when they attempt to save him from his own destiny, by giving him more
comfortable situations and more decent and reliable society. Yes, he
will even get to admire the unconscious lust of destruction with which
all mediocre spirits stand up and oppose him, believing all the while
that they have a holy right to do so! For men of such incomprehensible
loneliness it is necessary to put a good stretch of country between
them and the officiousness of their fellows: this is part of their
prudence. For such a man to maintain himself uppermost to-day amid
the dangerous maelstroms of the age which threaten to draw him under,
even cunning and disguise will be necessary. Every attempt he makes to
order his life in the present and with the present, every time he draws
near to these men and their modern desires, he will have to expiate as
if it were an actual sin: and withal he may look with wonder at the
concealed wisdom of his nature, which after every one of these attempts
immediately leads him back to himself by means of illnesses and painful
accidents.

"Maledetto colui
che contrista, un spirto immortal!"
MANZONI (Conte di Carmagnola, Act II.)

The most difficult and the highest form which man can attain is the
most seldom successful: thus the history of philosophy reveals a
superabundance of bungled and unhappy cases of manhood, and its march
is an extremely slow one; whole centuries intervene and suppress what
has been achieved: and in this way the connecting-link is always made
to fail. It is an appalling history, this history of the highest men,
of the sages.--What is most often damaged is precisely the recollection
of great men, for the semi-successful and botched cases of mankind
misunderstand them and overcome them by their "successes." Whenever
an "effect" is noticeable, the masses gather in a crowd round it;
to hear the inferior and the poor in spirit having their say is a
terrible ear-splitting torment for him who knows and trembles at the
thought, that the fate of man depends upon the success of its highest
types. From the days of my childhood I have reflected upon the sage's
conditions of existence, and I will not conceal my happy conviction
that in Europe he has once more become possible--perhaps only for a
short time.

These new philosophers begin with a description of a systematic order
of rank and difference of value among men,--what they desire is, alas
precisely the reverse of an assimilation and equalisation of man: they
teach estrangement in every sense, they cleave gulfs such as have
never yet existed, and they would fain have man become more evil than
he ever was. For the present they live concealed and estranged even
from each other. For many reasons they will find it necessary to be
anchorites and to wear masks--they will therefore be of little use
in the matter of seeking for their equals. They will live alone, and
probably know the torments of all the loneliest forms of loneliness.
Should they, however, thanks to any accident, meet each other on the
road, I wager that they would not know each other, or that they would
deceive each other in a number of ways.

"Les philosophes ne sont pas faits pour s'aimer. Les aigles ne volent
point en compagnie. Il faut laisser cela aux perdrix, aux etourneaux
... Planer au-dessus et avoir des griffes, voila le lot des grands
genies."--GALIANI.

I forgot to say that such philosophers are cheerful, and that they
like to sit in the abyss of a perfectly clear sky: they are in need of
different means for enduring life than other men; for they suffer in
a different way (that is to say, just as much from the depth of their
contempt of man as from their love of man).--The animal which suffered
most on earth discovered for itself --laughter.

Concerning the misunderstanding of "cheerfulness." --It is a
temporary relief from long tension; it is the wantonness, the
Saturnalia of a spirit, which is consecrating and preparing itself for
long and terrible resolutions. The "fool" in the form of "science."

The new order of rank among spirits; tragic natures no longer in the
van.

It is a comfort to me to know that over the smoke and filth of human
baseness there is a higher and brighter mankind, which, judging from
their number, must be a small race (for everything that is in any way
distinguished is ipso facto rare). A man does not belong to this race
because he happens to be more gifted, more virtuous, more heroic, or
more loving than the men below, but because he is colder, brighter,
more far-sighted, and more lonely; because he endures, prefers, and
even insists upon, loneliness as the joy, the privilege, yea, even the
condition of existence; because he lives amid clouds and lightnings as
among his equals, and likewise among sunrays, dewdrops, snowflakes,
and all that which must needs come from the heights, and which in its
course moves ever from heaven to earth. The desire to look aloft is not
our desire.--Heroes, martyrs, geniuses, and enthusiasts of all kinds,
are not quiet, patient, subtle, cold, or slow enough for us.

The absolute conviction that valuations above and below are different;
that innumerable experiences are wanting to the latter: that when
looking upwards from below misunderstandings are necessary.

How do men attain to great power and to great tasks? All the virtues
and proficiences of the body and the soul are little by little
laboriously acquired, through great industry, self-control, and keeping
one's self within narrow bounds, through a frequent, energetic, and
genuine repetition of the same work and of the same hardships; but
there are men who are the heirs and masters of this slowly acquired
and manifold treasure of virtues and proficiences because, owing
to happy and reasonable marriages and also to lucky accidents, the
acquired and accumulated forces of many generations, instead of being
squandered and subdivided, have been assembled together by means of
steadfast struggling and willing. And thus, in the end, a man appears
who is such a monster of strength, that he craves for a monstrous
task. For it is our power which has command of us: and the wretched
intellectual play of aims and intentions and motivations lies only in
the foreground--however much weak eyes may recognise the principal
factors in these things.

The sublime man has the highest value, even when he is most delicate
and fragile, because an abundance of very difficult and rare things
have been reared through many generations and united in him.

I teach that there are higher and lower men, and that a single
individual may under certain circumstances justify whole millenniums of
existence --that is to say, a wealthier, more gifted, greater, and more
complete man, as compared with innumerable imperfect and fragmentary
men.

Away from rulers and rid of all bonds, live the highest men: and in the
rulers they have their instruments.

The order of rank: he who determines values and leads the will of
millenniums, and does this by leading the highest natures--he is the
highest man.

I fancy I have divined some of the things that lie hidden in the soul
of the highest man; perhaps every man who has divined so much must go
to ruin: but he who has seen the highest man must do all he can to
make him possible. Fundamental thought: we must make the future the
standard of all our valuations--and not seek the laws for our conduct
behind us.

Not "mankind," but Superman is the goal!

"Come l'uom s'eterna...."--Inf. xv. 85.

II.

DIONYSUS.

To him who is one of Nature's lucky strokes, to, him unto whom my
heart goes out, to him who is carved from one integral block, which is
hard, sweet, and fragrant--to him from whom even my nose can derive
some pleasure--let this book be dedicated.

He enjoys that which is beneficial to him.

His pleasure in anything ceases when the limits of what is beneficial
to him are overstepped.

He divines the remedies for partial injuries; his illnesses are the
great stimulants of his existence.

He understands how to exploit his serious accidents.

He grows stronger under the misfortunes which threaten to annihilate
him.

He instinctively gathers from all he sees, hears, and experiences,
the materials for what concerns him most,--he pursues a selective
principle,--he rejects a good deal.

He reacts with that tardiness which long caution and deliberate
pride have bred in him,--he tests the stimulus: whence does it come?
whither does it lead? He does not submit.

He is always in his own company, whether his intercourse be with books,
with men, or with Nature.

He honours anything by choosing it, by conceding to it, by trusting it.

We should attain to such a height, to such a lofty eagle's ledge, in
our observation, as to be able to understand that everything happens,
just as it ought to happen: and that all "imperfection," and the pain
it brings, belong to all that which is most eminently desirable.

Towards 1876 I experienced a fright; for I saw that everything I had
most wished for up to that time was being compromised. I realised this
when I perceived what Wagner was actually driving at: and I was bound
very fast to him--by all the bonds of a profound similarity of needs,
by gratitude, by the thought that he could not be replaced, and by the
absolute void which I saw facing me.

Just about this time I believed myself to be inextricably entangled in
my philology and my professorship--in the accident and last shift of my
life: I did not know how to get out of it, and was tired, used up, and
on my last legs.

At about the same time I realised that what my instincts most desired
to attain was precisely the reverse of what Schopenhauer's instincts
wanted--that is to say, a justification of life, even where it was
most terrible, most equivocal, and most false: to this end, I had the
formula "Dionysian" in my hand.

Schopenhauer's interpretation of the "absolute" as will was certainly
a step towards that concept of the "absolute" which supposed it to be
necessarily good, blessed, true, and integral, but Schopenhauer did
not understand how to deify this will: he remained suspended in the
moral-Christian ideal. Indeed, he was still so very much under the
dominion of Christian values, that, once he could no longer regard
the absolute as God, he had to conceive it as evil, foolish, utterly
reprehensible. He did not realise that there is an infinite number of
ways of being different, and even of being God.

Hitherto, moral values have been the highest values: does anybody doubt
this? If we bring down the values from their pedestal, we thereby
alter all values; the principle of their order of rank which has
prevailed hitherto is thus overthrown.

Transvalue values--what does this mean? It implies that all spontaneous
motives, all new, future, and stronger motives, are still extant; but
that they now appear under false names and false valuations, and have
not yet become conscious of themselves.

We ought to have the courage to become, conscious, and to affirm all
that which has been attained--to get rid of the humdrum character
of old valuations, which makes us unworthy of the best and strongest
things that we have achieved.

Any doctrine would be superfluous for which everything is not already
prepared in the way of accumulated forces and explosive material. A
transvaluation of values can only be accomplished when there is a
tension of new needs, and a new set of needy people who feel all old
values as painful,--although they are not conscious of what is wrong.

The standpoint from which my values are determined: is abundance or
desire active? ... Is one a mere spectator, or is one's own shoulder
at the wheel--is one looking away or is one turning aside? ... Is one
acting spontaneously, as the result of accumulated strength, or is one
merely reacting to a goad or to a stimulus? ... Is one simply acting
as the result of a paucity of elements, or of such an overwhelming
dominion over a host of elements that this power enlists the latter
into its service if it requires them? ... Is one a problem one's
self or is one a solution already? ... Is one perfect through
the smallness of the task, or imperfect owing to the extraordinary
character of the aim? ... Is one genuine or only an actor; is one
genuine as an actor, or only the bad copy of an actor? is one a
representative or the creature represented? Is one a personality or
merely a rendezvous of personalities? ... Is one ill from a disease or
from surplus health? Does one lead as a shepherd, or as an "exception"
(third alternative: as a fugitive)? Is one in need of dignity, or can
one play the clown? Is one in search of resistance, or is one evading
it? Is one imperfect owing to one's precocity or to one's tardiness? Is
it one's nature to say yea, or no, or is one a peacock's tail of garish
parts? Is one proud enough not to feel ashamed even of one's vanity? Is
one still able to feel a bite of conscience (this species is becoming
rare; formerly conscience had to bite too often: it is as if it now no
longer had enough teeth to do so)? Is one still capable of a "duty"?
(there are some people who would lose the whole joy of their lives
if they were deprived of their duty--this holds good especially of
feminine creatures, who are born subjects).

Supposing our common comprehension of the universe were a
misunderstanding, would it be possible to conceive of a form of
perfection, within the limits of which even such a misunderstanding
as this could be sanctioned?

The concept of a new form of perfection: that which does not
correspond to our logic, to our "beauty," to our "good," to our
"truth," might be perfect in a higher sense even than our ideal is.

Our most important limitation: we must not deify the unknown; we are
just beginning to know so little. The false and wasted endeavours.

Our "new world": we must ascertain to what extent we are the creators
of our valuations--we will thus be able to put "sense" into history.

This belief in truth is reaching its final logical conclusion in
us--ye know how it reads: that if there is anything at all that must
be worshipped it is appearance; that falsehood and not truth
is--divine.

He who urges rational thought forward, thereby also drives its
antagonistic power--mysticism and foolery of every kind--to new feats
of strength.

We should recognise that every movement is (1) partly the
manifestation of fatigue resulting from a previous movement (satiety
after it, the malice of weakness towards it, and disease); and (2)
partly a newly awakened accumulation of long slumbering forces, and
therefore wanton, violent, healthy.

Health and morbidness: let us be careful! The standard is the bloom of
the body, the agility, courage, and cheerfulness of the mind--but also,
of course, how much morbidness a man can bear and overcome,--and
convert into health. That which would send more delicate natures to the
dogs, belongs to the stimulating means of great health.

It is only a question of power: to have all the morbid traits of the
century, but to balance them I by means of overflowing, plastic, and
rejuvenating power. The strong man.

Concerning the strength of the nineteenth century.--We are more
mediaeval than the eighteenth century; not only more inquisitive or more
susceptible to the strange and to the rare. We have revolted against
the Revolution, ... We have freed ourselves from the fear of reason,
which was the spectre of the eighteenth century: we once more dare to
be childish, lyrical, absurd, in a word, we are musicians. And we are
just as little frightened of the ridiculous as of the absurd. The
devil finds that he is tolerated even by God:[6] better still, he has
become interesting as one who has been misunderstood and slandered for
ages,--we are the saviours of the devil's honour.

We no longer separate the great from the terrible. We reconcile good
things, in all their complexity, with the very worst things; we
have overcome the desideratum of the past (which wanted goodness to
grow without the increase of evil). The cowardice towards the ideal,
peculiar to the Renaissance, has diminished--we even dare to aspire to
the latter's morality. Intolerance towards priests and the Church has
at the same time come to an end; "It is immoral to believe in God"--but
this is precisely what we regard as the best possible justification of
this belief.

On all these things we have conferred the civic rights of our minds. We
do not tremble before the back side of "good things" (we even look for
it, we are brave and inquisitive enough for that), of Greek antiquity,
of morality, of reason, of good taste, for instance (we reckon up
the losses which we incur with all this treasure: we almost reduce
ourselves to poverty with such a treasure). Neither do we conceal the
back side of "evil things" from ourselves.

[Footnote 6: This is reminiscent of Goethe's Faust, See "Prologue in
Heaven."--Tr.]

That which does us honour.--If anything does us honour, it is this:
we have transferred our seriousness to other things; all those things
which have been despised and laid aside as base by all ages, we regard
as important--on the other hand, we surrender "fine feelings" at a
cheap rate.

Could any aberration be more dangerous than the contempt of the body?
As if all intellectuality were not thereby condemned to become morbid,
and to take refuge in the vapeurs of "idealism"!

Nothing that has been thought out by Christians and idealists holds
water: we are more radical. We have discovered the "smallest world"
everywhere as the most decisive.

The paving-stones in the streets, good air in our rooms, food
understood according to its worth: we value all the necessaries of
life seriously, and despise all "beautiful soulfulness" as a form of
"levity and frivolity." That which has been most despised hitherto, is
now pressed into the front rank.

In the place of Rousseau's "man of Nature," the nineteenth century has
discovered a much more genuine image of "Man,"--it had the courage
to do this.... On the whole, the Christian concept of man has in a way
been reinstalled. What we have not had the courage to do, was to call
precisely this "man par excellence," good, and to see the future of
mankind guaranteed in him. In the same way, we did not dare to regard
the growth in the terrible side of man's character as an accompanying
feature of every advance in culture; in this sense we are still
under the influence of the Christian ideal, and side with it against
paganism, and likewise against the Renaissance concept of virtu. But
the key of culture is not to be found in this way: and in praxi we
still have the forgeries of history in favour of the "good man" (as if
he alone constituted the progress of humanity) and the socialistic
ideal (i.e. the residue of Christianity and of Rousseau in the
de-Christianised world).

The fight against the eighteenth century: it meets with its greatest
conquerors in Goethe and Napoleon. Schopenhauer, too, fights
against the eighteenth century; but he returns involuntarily to
the seventeenth--he is a modern Pascal, with Pascalian valuations,
without Christianity. Schopenhauer was not strong enough to invent a
new yea.

Napoleon: we see the necessary relationship between the higher and
the terrible man. "Man" reinstalled, and her due of contempt and fear
restored to woman. Highest activity and health are the signs of the
great man; the straight line and grand style rediscovered in action;
the mightiest of all instincts, that of life itself,--the lust of
dominion,--heartily welcomed.

(Revue des deux mondes, 15th February 1887. Taine concerning
Napoleon) "Suddenly the master faculty reveals itself: the artist,
which was latent in the politician, comes forth from his scabbard; he
creates dans l'ideal et l'impossible. He is once more recognised as
that which he is: the posthumous brother of Dante and of Michelangelo;
and verily, in view of the definite contours of his vision, the
intensity, the coherence, and inner consistency of his dream, the depth
of his meditations, the superhuman greatness of his conception, he is
their equal: son genie a la meme taille et la meme structure; il est
un des trois esprits souverains de la renaissance italienne."

Nota bene. Dante, Michelangelo, Napoleon.

Concerning the pessimism of strength. In the internal economy of
the primitive man's soul, the fear of evil preponderates. What is
evil! Three kinds of things: accident, uncertainty, the unexpected.
How does primitive man combat evil?--He conceives it as a thing of
reason, of power, even as a person. By this means he is enabled to
make treaties with it, and generally to operate upon it in advance--to
forestall it.

--Another expedient is to declare its evil and harmful character to
be but apparent: the consequences of accidental occurrences, and of
uncertainty and the unexpected, are interpreted as well-meant, as
reasonable.

--A third means is to interpret evil, above all, as merited: evil is
thus justified as a punishment.

--In short, man submits to in all religious and moral interpretations
are but forms of submission to evil.--The belief that a good purpose
lies behind all evil, implies the renunciation of any desire to combat
it.

Now, the history of every culture shows a diminution of this fear
of the accidental, of the uncertain, and of the unexpected. Culture
means precisely, to learn to reckon, to discover causes, to acquire
the power of forestalling events, to acquire a belief in necessity.
With the growth of culture, man is able to dispense with that primitive
form of submission to evil (called religion or morality), and that
"justification of evil." Now he wages war against "evil,"--he gets rid
of it. Yes, a state of security, of belief in law and the possibility
of calculation, is possible, in which consciousness regards these
things with tedium,--in which the joy of the accidental, of the
uncertain, and of the unexpected, actually becomes a spur.

Let us halt a moment before this symptom of highest culture, I
call it the pessimism of strength. Man now no longer requires a
"justification of evil"; justification is precisely what he abhors:
he enjoys evil, pur, cru; he regards purposeless evil as the most
interesting kind of evil. If he had required a God in the past, he now
delights in cosmic disorder without a God, a world of accident, to the
essence of which terror, ambiguity, and seductiveness belong.

In a state of this sort, it is precisely goodness which requires
to be justified--that is to say, it must either have an evil and a
dangerous basis, or else it must contain a vast amount of stupidity:
in which case it still pleases. Animality no longer awakens terror
now; a very intellectual and happy wanton spirit in favour of the
animal in man, is, in such periods, the most triumphant form of
spirituality. Man is now strong enough to be able to feel ashamed of
a belief in God: he may now play the part of the devil's advocate
afresh. If in practice he pretends to uphold virtue, it will be for
those reasons which lead virtue to be associated with subtlety,
cunning, lust of gain, and a form of the lust of power.

This pessimism of strength also ends in a theodicy, i.e. in an
absolute saying of yea to the world--but the same arguments will
be raised in favour of life which formerly were raised against it:
and in this way, in a conception of this world as the highest ideal
possible, which has been effectively attained.

The principal kinds of pessimism:--

The pessimism of sensitiveness (excessive irritability with a
preponderance of the feelings of pain).

The pessimism of the will that is not free (otherwise expressed: the
lack of resisting power against stimuli).

The pessimism of doubt (shyness in regard to everything fixed, in
regard to all grasping and touching).

The psychological conditions which belong to these different kinds of
pessimism, may all be observed in a lunatic asylum, even though they
are there found in a slightly exaggerated form. The same applies to
"Nihilism" (the penetrating feeling of nonentity).

What, however, is the nature of Pascal's moral pessimism, and the
metaphysical pessimism of the Vedanta-Philosophy? What is the nature
of the social pessimism of anarchists (as of Shelley), and of the
pessimism of compassion (like that of Leo Tolstoy and of Alfred de
Vigny)?

Are all these things not also the phenomena of decay and sickness?...
And is not excessive seriousness in regard to moral values, or in
regard to "other-world" fictions, or social calamities, or suffering
in general, of the same order? All such exaggeration of a single and
narrow standpoint is in itself a sign of sickness. The same applies to
the preponderance of a negative over an affirmative attitude!

In this respect we must not confound with the above: the joy of
saying and doing no, which is the result of the enormous power and
tenseness of an affirmative attitude--peculiar to all rich and mighty
men and ages. It is, as it were, a luxury, a form of courage too,
which opposes the terrible, which has sympathy with the frightful and
the questionable, because, among other things, one is terrible and
questionable: the Dionysian in will, intellect, and taste.

My Five "Noes."

My fight against the feeling of sin and the introduction of
the notion of punishment into the physical and metaphysical world,
likewise into psychology and the interpretation of history. The
recognition of the fact that all philosophies and valuations hitherto
have been saturated with morality.

My identification and my discovery of the traditional ideal,
of the Christian ideal, even where the dogmatic form of Christianity
has been wrecked. The danger of the Christian ideal resides in its
valuations, in that which can dispense with concrete expression: my
struggle against latent Christianity (for instance, in music, in
Socialism).

My struggle against the eighteenth century of Rousseau, against
his "Nature," against his "good man," his belief in the dominion of
feeling--against the pampering, weakening, and moralising of man: an
ideal born of the hatred of aristocratic culture, which in practice
is the dominion of unbridled feelings of resentment, and invented as a
standard for the purpose of war (the Christian morality of the feeling
of sin, as well as the morality of resentment, is an attitude of the
mob).

My fight against Romanticism, in which the ideals of Christianity
and of Rousseau converge, but which possesses at the same time a
yearning for that antiquity which knew of sacerdotal and aristocratic
culture, a yearning for virtu, and for the "strong man"--something
extremely hybrid; a false and imitated kind of stronger humanity,
which appreciates extreme conditions in general and sees the symptom
of strength in them ("the cult of passion"; an imitation of the
most expressive forms, furore espressivo, originating not out of
plenitude, but out of want).--(In the nineteenth century there are
some things which are born out of relative plenitude--i.e. out of
well-being; cheerful music, etc.--among poets, for instance, Stifter
and Gottfried Keller give signs of more strength and inner well-being
than--. The great strides of engineering, of inventions, of the natural
sciences and of history (?) are relative products of the strength and
self-reliance of the nineteenth century.)

My struggle against the predominance of gregarious instincts, now
science makes common cause with them; against the profound hate with
which every kind of order of rank and of aloofness is treated.

From the pressure of plenitude, from the tension of forces that are
continually increasing within us and which cannot yet discharge
themselves, a condition is produced which is very similar to that which
precedes a storm: we--like Nature's sky--become overcast. I hat, too,
is "pessimism.".. A teaching which puts an end to such a condition by
the fact that it commands something: a transvaluation of values by
means of which the accumulated forces are given a channel, a direction,
so that they explode into deeds and flashes of lightning-does not
in the least require to be a hedonistic teaching: in so far as it
releases strength which was compressed to an agonising degree, it
brings happiness.

Pleasure appears with the feeling of power.

Happiness means that the consciousness of power and triumph has begun
to prevail.

Progress is the strengthening of the type, the ability to exercise
great will-power, everything else is a misunderstanding and a danger.

There comes a time when the old masquerade and moral togging-up of the
passions provokes repugnance: naked Nature; when the quanta of
power are recognised as decidedly simple (as determining rank);
when grand style appears again as the result of great passion.

The purpose of culture would have us enlist everything terrible,
step by step and experimentally, into its service; but before it is
strong enough for this it must combat, moderate, mask, and even curse
everything terrible.

Wherever a culture points to anything as evil, it betrays its fear
and therefore weakness.

Thesis: everything good is the evil of yore which has been rendered
serviceable. Standard: the more terrible and the greater the passions
may be which an age, a people, and an individual are at liberty to
possess, because they are able to use them as a means, the higher is
their culture: the more mediocre, weak, submissive, and cowardly a man
may be, the more things he will regard as evil: according to him the
kingdom of evil is the largest. The lowest man will see the kingdom of
evil (i.e. that which is forbidden him and which is hostile to him)
everywhere.

It is not a fact that "happiness follows virtue"--but it is the mighty
man who first declares his happy state to be virtue.

Evil actions belong to the mighty and the virtuous: bad and base
actions belong to the subjected.

The mightiest man, the creator, would have to be the most evil,
inasmuch as he makes his ideal prevail over all men in opposition to
their ideals, and remoulds them according to his own image.

Evil, in this respect, means hard, painful, enforced.

Such men as Napoleon must always return and always settle our belief
in the self-glory of the individual afresh: he himself, however, was
corrupted by the means he had to stoop to, and had lost noblesse
of character. If he had had to prevail among another kind of men, he
could have availed himself of other means; and thus it would not seem
necessary that a Caesar must become bad.

Man is a combination of the beast and the super-beast; higher
man a combination of the monster and the superman:[7] these opposites
belong to each other. With every degree of a man's growth towards
greatness and loftiness, he also grows downwards into the depths and
into the terrible: we should not desire the one without the other;--or,
better still: the more fundamentally we desire the one, the more
completely we shall achieve the other.

[Footnote 7: The play on the German words: "Unthier" and "Uberthier,"
"Unmensch" and "Ubermensch," is unfortunately not translatable.--Tr.]

Terribleness belongs to greatness: let us not deceive ourselves.

I have taught the knowledge of such terrible things, that all
"Epicurean contentment" is impossible concerning them. Dionysian
pleasure is the only adequate kind here: I was the first to discover
the tragic. Thanks to their superficiality in ethics, the Greeks
misunderstood it. Resignation is not the lesson of tragedy, but only
the misunderstanding of it! The yearning for nonentity is the denial
of tragic wisdom, its opposite!

A rich and powerful soul not only gets over painful and even terrible
losses, deprivations, robberies, and insults: it actually leaves such
dark infernos in possession of still greater plenitude and power;
and, what is most important of all, in possession of an increased
blissfulness in love. I believe that he who has divined something of
the most fundamental conditions of love, will understand Dante for
having written over the door of his Inferno: "I also am the creation of
eternal love."

To have travelled over the whole circumference of the modern soul,
and to have sat in all its corners--my ambition, my torment, and my
happiness.

Veritably to have overcome pessimism, and, as the result thereof, to
have acquired the eyes of a Goethe--full of love and goodwill.

The first question is by no means whether we are satisfied with
ourselves; but whether we are satisfied with anything at all. Granting
that we should say yea to any single moment, we have then affirmed
not only ourselves, but the whole of existence. For nothing stands by
itself, either in us or in other things: and if our soul has vibrated
and rung with happiness, like a chord, once only and only once, then
all eternity was necessary in order to bring about that one event,--and
all eternity, in this single moment of our affirmation, was called
good, was saved, justified, and blessed.

The passions which say yea. I ride, happiness, health, the love of
the sexes, hostility and war, reverence, beautiful attitudes, manners,
strong will, the discipline of lofty spirituality, the will to power,
and gratitude to the Earth and to Life: all that is rich, that would
fain bestow, and that refreshes, gilds, immortalises, and deifies
Life--the whole power of the virtues that glorify--all declaring
things good, saying yea, and doing yea.

We, many or few, who once more dare to live in a world purged of
morality, we pagans in faith, we are probably also the first who
understand what a pagan faith is: to be obliged to imagine higher
creatures than man, but to imagine them beyond good and evil; to be
compelled to value all higher existence as immoral existence. We
believe in Olympus, and not in the "man on the cross."

The more modern man has exercised his idealising power in regard to a
God mostly by moralising the latter ever more and more--what does
that mean?--nothing good, a diminution in man's strength.

As a matter of fact, the reverse would be possible: and indications
of this are not wanting. God imagined as emancipation from morality,
comprising the whole of the abundant assembly of Life's contrasts, and
saving and justifying them in a divine agony. God as the beyond,
the superior elevation, to the wretched cul-de-sac morality of "Good
and Evil."

A humanitarian God cannot be demonstrated from the world that
is known to us: so much are ye driven and forced to conclude
to-day. But what conclusion do ye draw from this? "He cannot be
demonstrated to us": the scepticism of knowledge. You all fear
the conclusion: "From the world that is known to us quite a different
God would be demonstrable, such a one as would certainly not be
humanitarian"--and, in a word, you cling fast to your God, and invent a
world for Him which is unknown to us.

Let us banish the highest good from our concept of God: it is unworthy
of a God. Let us likewise banish the highest wisdom: it is the vanity
of philosophers who have perpetrated the absurdity of a God who is a
monster of wisdom: the idea was to make Him as like them as possible.
No! God as the highest power--that is sufficient!--Everything
follows from that, even--"the world"!

And how many new Gods are not still possible! I, myself, in whom the
religious--that is to say, the god-creating instinct occasionally
becomes active at the most inappropriate moments: how very differently
the divine has revealed itself every time to me! ... So many strange
things have passed before me in those timeless moments, which fall into
a man's life as if they came from the moon, and in which he absolutely
no longer knows how old he is or how young he still may be! ... I would
not doubt that there are several kinds of gods.... Some are not wanting
which one could not possibly imagine without a certain halcyonic calm
and levity.... Light feet perhaps belong to the concept "God". Is it
necessary to explain that a God knows how to hold Himself preferably
outside all Philistine and rationalist circles? also (between
ourselves) beyond good and evil? His outlook is a free one--as Goethe
would say.--And to invoke the authority of Zarathustra, which cannot be
too highly appreciated in this regard: Zarathustra goes as far as to
confess, "I would only believe in a God who knew how to dance ..."

Again I say: how many new Gods are not still possible! Certainly
Zarathustra himself is merely an old atheist: he believes neither in
old nor in new gods. Zarathustra says, "he would"--but Zarathustra
will not.... Take care to understand him well.

The type God conceived according to the type of creative spirits, of
"great men."

And how many new ideals are not, at bottom, still possible? Here is
a little ideal that I seize upon every five weeks, while upon a wild
and lonely walk, in the azure moment of a blasphemous joy. To spend
one's life amid delicate and absurd things; a stranger to reality,
half-artist, half-bird, half-metaphysician; without a yea or a nay for
reality, save that from time to time one acknowledges it, after the
manner of a good dancer, with the tips of one's toes; always tickled
by some happy ray of sunlight; relieved and encouraged even by sorrow
--for sorrow preserves the happy man; fixing a little tail of jokes
even to the most holy thing: this, as is clear, is the ideal of a heavy
spirit, a ton in weight of the spirit of gravity.

From the military-school of the soul. (Dedicated to the brave, the
good-humoured, and the abstinent.)

I should not like to undervalue the amiable virtues; but greatness
of soul is not compatible with them. Even in the arts, grand style
excludes all merely pleasing qualities.

In times of painful tension and vulnerability, choose war. War hardens
and develops muscle.

Those who have been deeply wounded have the Olympian laughter; a man
only has what he needs.

It has now already lasted ten years: no sound any longer reaches
me--a land without rain. A man must have a vast amount of humanity at
his disposal in order not to pine away in such drought.[8]

[Footnote 8: For the benefit of those readers who are not acquainted
with the circumstances of Nietzsche's life, it would be as well to
point out that this is a purely personal plaint, comprehensible enough
in the mouth of one who, like Nietzsche, was for years a lonely
anchorite.--Tr.]

My new road to an affirmative attitude.--Philosophy, as I have
understood it and lived it up to the present, is the voluntary quest
of the repulsive and atrocious aspects of existence. From the long
experience derived from such wandering over ice and desert, I learnt
to regard quite differently everything that had been philosophised
hitherto: the concealed history of philosophy, the psychology of its
great names came into the light for me. "How much truth can a spirit
endure; for how much truth is it daring enough?"--this for me
was the real measure of value. Error is a piece of cowardice ...
every victory on the part of knowledge, is the result of courage, of
hardness towards one's self, of cleanliness towards one's self.... The
kind of experimental philosophy which I am living, even anticipates
the possibility of the most fundamental Nihilism, on principle: but
by this I do not mean that it remains standing at a negation, at a
no, or at a will to negation. It would rather attain to the very
reverse--to a Dionysian affirmation of the world, as it is, without
subtraction, exception, or choice--it would have eternal circular
motion: the same things, the same reasoning, and the same illogical
concatenation. The highest state to which a philosopher can attain: to
maintain a Dionysian attitude to Life--my formula for this is amor
fati.

To this end we must not only consider those aspects of life which
have been denied hitherto, as: necessary, but as desirable, and not
only desirable to those aspects which have been affirmed hitherto (as
complements or first prerequisites, so to speak), but for their own
sake, as the more powerful, more terrible, and more veritable aspects
of life, in which the latter's will expresses itself most clearly.

To this end, we must also value that aspect of existence which alone
has been affirmed until now; we must understand whence this valuation
arises, and to how slight an extent it has to do with a Dionysian
valuation of Life: I selected and understood that which in this respect
says "yea" (on the one hand, the instinct of the sufferer; on the
other, the gregarious instinct; and thirdly, the instinct of the
greater number against the exceptions).

Thus I divined to what extent a stronger kind of man must necessarily
imagine--the elevation and enhancement of man in another direction:
higher creatures, beyond good and evil, beyond those values which
bear the stamp of their origin in the sphere of suffering, of the herd,
and of the greater number--I searched for the data of this topsy-turvy
formation of ideals in history (the concepts "pagan," "classical,"
"noble," have been discovered afresh and brought forward).

We should demonstrate to what extent the religion of the Greeks was
higher than Judaeo-Christianity. The latter triumphed because the
Greek religion was degenerate (and decadent).

It is not surprising that a couple of centuries have been necessary in
order to link up again--a couple of centuries are very little indeed.

There must be some people who sanctify functions, not only eating and
drinking, and not only in memory of them, or in harmony with them; but
this world must be for ever glorified anew, and in a novel fashion.

The most intellectual men feel the ecstasy and charm of sensual
things in a way which other men --those with "fleshy hearts"--cannot
possibly imagine, and ought not to be able to imagine: they are
sensualists with the best possible faith, because they grant the senses
a more fundamental value than that fine sieve, that thinning and
mincing machine, or whatever it is called, which in the language of the
people is termed "spirit" The strength and power of the senses--this
is the most essential thing in a sound man who is one of Nature's lucky
strokes: the splendid beast must first be there--otherwise what is the
value of all "humanisation"?

We want to hold fast to our senses, and to the belief in them--and
accept their logical conclusions! The hostility to the senses in the
philosophy that has been written up to the present, has been man's
greatest feat of nonsense.

The world now extant, on which all earthly and living things have
so built themselves, that it now appears as it does (enduring and
proceeding slowly), we would fain continue building--not criticise it
away as false!

Our valuations help in the process of building; they emphasise and
accentuate. What does it mean when whole religions say: "Everything is
bad and false and evil"? This condemnation of the whole process can
only be the judgment of the failures!

True, the failures might be the greatest sufferers and therefore
the most subtle! The contented might be worth little!

We must understand the fundamental artistic phenomenon which is
called "Life,"--the formative spirit, which constructs under the most
unfavourable circumstances: and in the slowest manner possible----The
proof of all its combinations must first be given afresh: it
maintains itself.

Sexuality, lust of dominion, the pleasure derived from appearance
and deception, great and joyful gratitude to Life and its typical
conditions--these things are essential to all paganism, and it has
a good conscience on its side.--That which is hostile to Nature
(already in Greek antiquity) combats paganism in the form of morality
and dialectics.

An anti-metaphysical view of the world--yes, but an artistic one.

Apollo's misapprehension: the eternity of beautiful forms, the
aristocratic prescription, "Thus shall it ever be!"

Dionysus. Sensuality and cruelty. The perishable nature of existence
might be interpreted as the joy of procreative and destructive force,
as unremitting creation.

The word "Dionysian" expresses: a constraint to unity, a soaring
above personality, the common-place, society, reality, and above
the abyss of the ephemeral, the passionately painful sensation of
superabundance, in darker, fuller, and more fluctuating conditions;
an ecstatic saying of yea to the collective character of existence,
as that which remains the same, and equally mighty and blissful
throughout all change, the great pantheistic sympathy with pleasure
and pain, which declares even the most terrible and most questionable
qualities of existence good, and sanctifies them; the eternal will to
procreation, to fruitfulness, and to recurrence; the feeling of unity
in regard to the necessity of creating and annihilating.

The word "Apollonian" expresses: the constraint to be absolutely
isolated, to the typical "individual," to everything that simplifies,
distinguishes, and makes strong, salient, definite, and typical to
freedom within the law.

The further development of art is just as necessarily bound up with the
antagonism of these two natural art-forces, as the further development
of mankind is bound up with the antagonism of the sexes. The plenitude
of power and restraint, the highest form of self-affirmation in a cool,
noble, and reserved kind of beauty: the Apollonianism of the Hellenic
will.

This antagonism of the Dionysian and of the Apollonian in the Greek
soul, is one of the great riddles which made me feel drawn to the
essence of Hellenism. At bottom, I troubled about nothing save the
solution of the question, why precisely Greek Apollonianism should have
been forced to grow out of a Dionysian soil: the Dionysian Greek had
need of being Apollonian; that is to say in order to break his will to
the titanic, to the complex, to the uncertain, to the horrible by a
will to measure, to simplicity, and to submission to rule and concept.
Extravagance, wildness, and Asiatic tendencies lie at the root of the
Greeks. Their courage consists in their struggle with their Asiatic
nature: they were not given beauty, any more than they were given Logic
and moral! naturalness: in them these things are victories, they are
willed and fought for--they constitute the triumph of the Greeks.

It is clear that only the rarest and most lucky cases of humanity
can attain to the highest and most sublime human joys in which Life
celebrates its own glorification; and this only happens when these
rare creatures themselves and their forbears have lived a long
preparatory life leading to this goal, without, however, having done
so consciously. It is then that an overflowing wealth of multifarious
forces and the most agile power of "free will" and lordly command
exist together in perfect concord in one man; then the intellect is
just as much at ease, or at home, in the senses as the senses are at
ease or at home in it; and everything that takes place in the latter
must give rise to extraordinarily subtle joys in the former. And vice
versa: just think of this vice versa for a moment in a man like
Hafiz; even Goethe, though to a lesser degree, gives some idea of this
process. It is probable that, in such perfect and well-constituted
men, the most sensual functions are finally transfigured by a symbolic
elatedness of the highest intellectuality; in themselves they feel a
kind of deification of the body and are most remote from the ascetic
philosophy of the principle "God is a Spirit": from this principle it
is clear that the ascetic is the "botched man" who declares only that
to be good and "God" which is absolute, and which judges and condemns.

From that height of joy in which man feels himself completely and
utterly a deified form and self-justification of nature, down to the
joy of healthy peasants and healthy semi-human beasts, the whole of
this long and enormous gradation of the light and colour of happiness
was called by the Greek--not without that grateful quivering of one
who is initiated into secret, not without much caution and pious
silence--by the godlike name: Dionysus. What then do all modern
men--the children of a crumbling, multifarious, sick and strange age
know of the compass of Greek happiness, how could they know
anything about it! Whence would the slaves of "modern ideas" derive
their right to Dionysian feasts!

When the Greek body and soul were in full "bloom," and not, as it were,
in states of morbid exaltation and madness, there arose the secret
symbol of the loftiest affirmation and transfiguration of life and the
world that has ever existed. There we have a standard beside which
everything that has grown since must seem too short, too poor, too
narrow: if we but pronounce the word "Dionysus" in the presence of
the best of more recent names and things, in the presence of Goethe,
for instance, or Beethoven, or Shakespeare, or Raphael, in a trice we
realise that our best things and moments are condemned. Dionysus
is a judge! Am I understood? There can be no doubt that the Greeks
sought to interpret, by means of their Dionysian experiences, the
final mysteries of the "destiny of the soul" and everything they knew
concerning the education and the purification of man, and above all
concerning the absolute hierarchy and inequality of value between man
and man. There is the deepest experience of all Greeks, which they
conceal beneath great silence,--we do not know the Greeks so long
as this hidden and sub-terranean access to them remains obstructed.
The indiscreet eyes of scholars will never perceive anything in these
things, however much learned energy may still have to be expended in
the service of this excavation--; even the noble zeal of such friends
of antiquity as Goethe and Winckelmann, seems to savour somewhat of
bad form and of arrogance, precisely in this respect. To wait and to
prepare oneself; to await the appearance of new sources of knowledge;
to prepare oneself in solitude for the sight of new faces and the
sound of new voices; to cleanse one's soul ever more and more of the
dust and noise, as of a country fair, which is peculiar to this age;
to overcome everything Christian by something super-Christian,
and not only to rid oneself of it,--for the Christian doctrine is
the counter-doctrine to the Dionysian; to rediscover the South
in oneself, and to stretch a clear, glittering, and mysterious
southern sky above one; to reconquer the southern healthiness and
concealed power of the soul, once more for oneself; to increase the
compass of one's soul step by step, and to become more supernational,
more European, more super-European, more Oriental, and finally more
Hellenic--for Hellenism was, as a matter of fact, the first great
union and synthesis of everything Oriental, and precisely on that
account, the beginning of the European soul, the discovery of our
"new world":--he who lives under such imperatives, who knows what he
may not encounter some day? Possibly--a new dawn!

The two types; Dionysus and Christ on the Cross. We should ascertain
whether the typically religious man is a decadent phenomenon (the
great innovators are one and all morbid and epileptic); but do not let
us forget to include that type of the religious man who is pagan. Is
the pagan cult not a form of gratitude for, and affirmation of, Life?
Ought not its most representative type to be an apology and deification
of Life? The type of a well-constituted and ecstatically overflowing
spirit! The type of a spirit which absorbs the contradictions and
problems of existence, and which solves them!

At this point I set up the Dionysus of the Greeks: the religious
affirmation of Life, of the whole of Life, not of denied and partial
Life (it is typical that in this cult the sexual act awakens ideas of
depth, mystery, and reverence).

Dionysus versus "Christ"; here you have the contrast. It is not
a difference in regard to the martyrdom,--but the latter has a
different meaning. Life itself--Life s eternal fruitfulness and
recurrence caused anguish, destruction, and the will to annihilation.
In the other case, the suffering of the "Christ as the Innocent One"
stands as an objection against Life, it is the formula of Life's
condemnation.--Readers will guess that the problem concerns the meaning
of suffering; whether a Christian or a tragic meaning be given to it.
In the first case it is the road to a holy mode of existence; in the
second case existence itself is regarded as sufficiently holy to
justify an enormous amount of suffering. The tragic man says yea even
to the most excruciating suffering: he is sufficiently strong, rich,
and capable of deifying, to be able to do this; the Christian denies
even the happy lots on earth: he is weak, poor, and disinherited enough
to suffer from life in any form. God on the Cross is a curse upon Life,
a signpost directing people to deliver themselves from it;--Dionysus
cut into pieces is a promise of Life: it will be for ever born anew,
and rise afresh from destruction.

III.

ETERNAL RECURRENCE.

My philosophy reveals the triumphant thought through which all other
systems of thought must ultimately perish. It is the great disciplinary
thought: those races that cannot bear it are doomed; those which regard
it as the greatest blessing are destined to rule.

The greatest of all fights: for this purpose a new weapon is
required.

A hammer: a terrible alternative must be created. Europe must be
brought face to face with the logic of facts, and confronted with the
question whether its will for ruin is really earnest.

General levelling down to mediocrity must be avoided. Rather than this
it would be preferable to perish.

A pessimistic attitude of mind and a pessimistic doctrine and ecstatic
Nihilism, may in certain circumstances even prove indispensable to the
philosopher--that is to say, as a mighty form of pressure, or hammer,
with which he can smash up degenerate, perishing races and put them out
of existence; with which he can beat a track to a new order of life,
or instil a longing for nonentity in those who are degenerate and who
desire to perish.

I wish to teach the thought which gives unto many the right to cancel
their existences--the great disciplinary thought.

Eternal Recurrence. A prophecy.

The exposition of the doctrine and its theoretical first
principles and results.

The proof of the doctrine.

Probable results which will follow from its being believed. (It
makes everything break open.)

The means of enduring it.

The means of ignoring it.

Its place in history is a means.

The period of greatest danger. The foundation of an oligarchy above
peoples and their interests: education directed at establishing a
political policy for humanity in general.

A counterpart of Jesuitism.

The two greatest philosophical points of view (both discovered by
Germans).

That of becoming and that of evolution.

That based upon the values of existence (but the wretched form of
German pessimism must first be overcome!)--

Both points of view reconciled by me in a decisive manner.

Everything becomes and returns for ever, escape is impossible!

Granted that we could appraise the value of existence, what would
be the result of it? The thought of recurrence is a principle of
selection in the service of power (and barbarity!).

The ripeness of man for this thought.

The thought of eternal recurrence: its first principles which must
necessarily be true if it were true. What its result is.

It is the most oppressive thought: its probable results, provided
it be not prevented, that is to say, provided all values be not
transvalued.

The means of enduring it: the transvaluation of all values.
Pleasure no longer to be found in certainty, but in uncertainty; no
longer "cause and effect," but continual creativeness; no longer
the will to self-preservation, but to power; no longer the modest
expression "it is all only subjective," but "it is all our work!
let us be proud of it."

In order to endure the thought of recurrence, freedom from morality
is necessary; new means against the fact pain (pain regarded as
the instrument, as the father of pleasure; there is no accretive
consciousness of pain); pleasure derived from all kinds of uncertainty
and tentativeness, as a counterpoise to extreme fatalism; suppression
of the concept "necessity"; suppression of the "will"; suppression of
"absolute knowledge."

Greatest elevation of man's consciousness of strength, as that
which creates superman.

The two extremes of thought--the materialistic and the platonic--are
reconciled in eternal recurrence: both are regarded as ideals.

If the universe had a goal, that goal would have been reached by now.
If any sort of unforeseen final state existed, that state also would
have! been reached. If it were capable of any halting or stability of
any being, it would only have possessed this capability of becoming
stable for one instant in its development; and again becoming would
have been at an end for ages, and with it all thinking and all
"spirit." The fact of "intellects" being in a state of development
proves that the universe can have no goal, no final state, and is
incapable of being. But the old habit of thinking of some purpose in
regard to all phenomena, and of thinking of a directing and creating
deity in regard to the universe, is so powerful, that the thinker has
to go to great pains in order to avoid thinking of the very aimlessness
of the world as intended. The idea that the universe intentionally
evades a goal, and even knows artificial means wherewith it prevents
itself from falling into a circular movement, must occur to all those
who would fain attribute to the universe the capacity of eternally
regenerating itself--that is to say, they would fain impose upon a
finite, definite force which is invariable in quantity, like the
universe, the miraculous gift of renewing its forms and its conditions
for all eternity. Although the universe is no longer a God, it must
still be capable of the divine power of creating and transforming;
it must forbid itself to relapse into any one of its previous forms;
it must not only have the intention, but also the means, of avoiding
any sort of repetition, every second of its existence, even, it must
control every single one of its movements, with the view of avoiding
goals, final states, and repetitions and all the other results of such
an unpardonable and insane method of thought and desire. All this
is nothing more than the old religious mode of thought and desire,
which, in spite of all, longs to believe that in some way or other the
universe resembles the old, beloved, infinite, and infinitely-creative
God--that in some way or other "the old God still lives"--that longing
of Spinoza's which is expressed in the words "deus sive natura"
(what he really felt was "natura sive deus"). Which, then, is the
proposition and belief in which the decisive change, the present
preponderance of the scientific spirit over the religious and
god-fancying spirit, is best formulated? Ought it not to be: the
universe, as force, must not be thought of as unlimited, because it
cannot be thought of in this way,--we forbid ourselves the concept
infinite force, because it is incompatible with the idea of force?
Whence it follows that the universe lacks the power of eternal renewal.

The principle of the conservation of energy inevitably involves
eternal recurrence.

That a state of equilibrium has never been reached, proves that it is
impossible, but in infinite space it must have been reached. Likewise
in spherical space. The form of space must be the cause of the
eternal movement, and ultimately of all imperfection. That "energy" and
"stability" and "immutability" are contradictory. The measure of energy
(dimensionally) is fixed though it is essentially fluid.

"That which is timeless" must be refuted, any given moment of energy,
the absolute conditions for a new distribution of all forces are
present, it cannot remain stationary. Change is part of its essence,
therefore time is as well; by this means, however, the necessity of
change has only been established once more in theory.

A certain emperor always bore the fleeting nature of all things in his
mind, in order not to value them too seriously, and to be able to live
quietly in their midst. Conversely, everything seems to me much too
important for it to be so fleeting, I seek an eternity for everything:
ought one to pour the most precious salves and wines into the sea? My
consolation is that everything that has been is eternal: the sea will
wash it up again.

The new concept of the universe. The universe exists; it is nothing
that grows into existence and that passes out of existence. Or, better
still, it develops, it passes away, but it never began to develop,
and has never ceased from passing away; it maintains itself in both
states. It lives on itself, its excrements are its nourishment.

We need not concern ourselves for one instant with the hypothesis of a
created world. The concept create is to-day utterly indefinable and
unrealisable; it is but a word which hails from superstitious ages,
nothing can be explained with a word. The last attempt that was made
to conceive of a world that began occurred quite recently, in many
cases with the help of logical reasoning,--generally, too, as you will
guess, with an ulterior theological motive.

Several attempts have been made lately to show that the concept that
"the universe has an infinite past (regressus in infinitum) is
contradictory, it was even demonstrated, it is true, at the price
of confounding the head with the tail. Nothing can prevent me from
calculating backwards from this moment of time, and of saying: "I
shall never reach the end"; just as I can calculate without end in a
forward direction, from the same moment. It is only when I wish to
commit the error--I shall be careful to avoid it--of reconciling this
correct concept of a regressus in infinitum with the absolutely
unrealisable concept of a finite progressus up to the present; only
when I consider the direction (forwards or backwards) as logically
indifferent, that I take hold of the head--this very moment--and think
I hold the tail: this pleasure I leave to you, Mr. Duhring!...

I have come across this thought in other thinkers before me, and every
time I found that it was determined by other ulterior motives (chiefly
theological, in favour of a creator spiritus). If the universe were
in any way able to congeal, to dry up, to perish; or if it were capable
of attaining to a state of equilibrium; or if it had any kind of goal
at all which a long lapse of time, immutability, and finality reserved
for it (in short, to speak metaphysically, if becoming could resolve
itself into being or into nonentity), this state ought already to have
been reached.

But it has not been reached: it therefore follows.... This is the only
certainty we can grasp, which can serve as a corrective to a host of
cosmic hypotheses possible in themselves. If, for instance, materialism
cannot consistently escape the conclusion of a finite state, which
William Thomson has traced out for it, then materialism is thereby
refuted.

If the universe may be conceived as a definite quantity of energy,
as a definite number of centres of energy,--and every other concept
remains indefinite and therefore useless,--it follows therefrom that
the universe must go through a calculable number of combinations in
the great game of chance which constitutes its existence. In infinity,
at some moment or other, every possible combination must once have
been realised; not only this, but it must have been realised an
infinite number of times. And inasmuch as between every one of these
combinations and its next recurrence every other possible combination
would necessarily have been undergone, and since every one of these
combinations would determine the whole series in the same order, a
circular movement of absolutely identical series is thus demonstrated:
the universe is thus shown to be a circular movement which has already
repeated itself an infinite number of times, and which plays its game
for all eternity.--This conception is not simply materialistic; for if
it were this, it would not involve an infinite recurrence of identical
cases, but a finite state. Owing to the fact that the universe has
not reached this finite state, materialism shows itself to be but an
imperfect and provisional hypothesis.

And do ye know what "the universe" is to my mind? Shall I show it
to you in my mirror? This universe is a monster of energy, without
beginning or end; a fixed and brazen quantity o; energy which grows
neither bigger nor smaller, which does not consume itself, but only
alters its face; as a whole its bulk is immutable, it is a household
without either losses or gains, but likewise without increase and
without sources of revenue, surrounded by nonentity as by a frontier,
it is nothing vague or wasteful, it does not stretch into infinity;
but it is a definite quantum of energy located in limited space,
and not in space which would be anywhere empty. It is rather energy
everywhere, the play of forces and force-waves, at the same time one
and many, agglomerating here and diminishing there, a sea of forces
storming and raging in itself, for ever changing, for ever rolling
back over in calculable ages to recurrence, with an ebb and flow of
its forms, producing the most complicated things out of the most
simple structures; producing the most ardent, most savage, and most
contradictory things out of the quietest, most rigid, and most frozen
material, and then returning from multifariousness to uniformity, from
the play of contradictions back into the delight of consonance, saying
yea unto itself, even in this homogeneity of its courses and ages; for
ever blessing itself as something which recurs for all eternity,--a
becoming which knows not satiety, or disgust, or weariness:--this, my
Dionysian world of eternal self-creation, of eternal self-destruction,
this mysterious world of twofold voluptuousness; this, my "Beyond Good
and Evil" without aim, unless there is an aim in the bliss of the
circle, without will, unless a ring must by nature keep goodwill to
itself,--would you have a name for my world? A solution of all your
riddles? Do ye also want a light, ye most concealed, strongest and
most undaunted men of the blackest midnight?--This world is the Will
to Power--and nothing else! And even ye yourselves are this will to
power--and nothing besides!